[Amit Varma]: The philosopher Thomas Nagel once wrote an essay called What is it like to be a bat?
[Amit Varma]: One of the arguments in that essay was that even if a human could try and imagine what
[Amit Varma]: it was like to be a bat by taking the bat's point of view, it is impossible to know what
[Amit Varma]: it is like for a bat to be a bat.
[Amit Varma]: If you wrote an essay called What is it like to be a woman, men would be in a similar situation.
[Amit Varma]: Our powers of empathy and imagination can only get us so far.
[Amit Varma]: We are mostly blind to the many ways in which women have to adapt to live in a world designed
[Amit Varma]: by men, for men.
[Amit Varma]: And so much have we normalized this, that even many women take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: What is it like to be a woman in a world where hotel rooms don't have latches on the inside,
[Amit Varma]: where offices don't have enough women's toilets, where workplaces don't account for periods
[Amit Varma]: or pregnancies, where the men are all raja betas and the women are grocery lists trapped
[Amit Varma]: in human bodies, as my guest today wrote, where you aren't taken seriously, you are
[Amit Varma]: interrupted all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And Fufaji is a bigot.
[Amit Varma]: All these extra layers of life that men just don't have to deal with, they need to be documented.
[Amit Varma]: Someone needs to write about what it's like to be womaning in India.
[Amit Varma]: Somebody is.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Mahima Vashisht, a former civil servant who runs a phenomenal newsletter,
[Amit Varma]: Womaning in India.
[Amit Varma]: Mahima did my writing course a couple of years ago, and at the end of the course asked for
[Amit Varma]: my advice on writing.
[Amit Varma]: We did a zoom call and she told me about an idea she had for a book to write about those
[Amit Varma]: aspects of women's lives that men had no clue about.
[Amit Varma]: I suggested that the best way to get the ball rolling was not to write a book straight away,
[Amit Varma]: for that can be a daunting project, but to start a weekly newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: So she did, and Womaning in India has now gathered a cult following.
[Amit Varma]: She's built a tremendous body of work documenting what women go through in the workplace, in
[Amit Varma]: public spaces, in their homes and in their own heads.
[Amit Varma]: She's spoken to countless women across this country, gathered their stories and illuminated
[Amit Varma]: a world that many men, even well-meaning men, would have been clueless about.
[Amit Varma]: So I figured I'd get her on the show to talk about her life, her work and Womaning in India.
[Amit Varma]: But first, let's go to a unique kind of commercial break, Capital Gyaan by Deepak Shannoy.
[Amit Varma]: This is like a show within a commercial from the kind sponsors of this episode, Capital
[Amit Varma]: Mind.
[Unknown]: When my father passed away, he left my mother's shares of over 30 different companies.
[Unknown]: When I look at them now, 23 of these companies are dead or defunct.
[Unknown]: Only 7 have given us a positive return.
[Unknown]: But these 7 have returned 40 times in the entire investment.
[Unknown]: That's a yearly return of 20% plus over 20 years from just one fourth of the stocks.
[Unknown]: Peter Lynch has said that booking profits on your winners to add to your losers is like
[Unknown]: pulling out the flowers and watering the weeds.
[Unknown]: Letting your winners run and not regretting your losers is one of the hallmarks of great
[Unknown]: investment returns.
[Unknown]: I'm Deepak Shannoy, CEO at Capital Mind.
[Unknown]: In our portfolio management service, we use both quantitative and qualitative measures
[Unknown]: to manage our portfolios, which gives us the confidence to hold on to our winners.
[Unknown]: Learn more about us at cm.social slash seen unseen, worry less about your money and make
[Unknown]: it work for you.
[Unknown]: cm.social slash seen unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, I want to repeat that URL cm.social slash seen unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Deepak has been a guest on my podcast and he handles my money as well.
[Amit Varma]: My actions are the best endorsement.
[Amit Varma]: Mahima, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm so glad to have you on.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so glad you agreed.
[Amit Varma]: I spent last night and today morning kind of going through your newsletter also.
[Amit Varma]: And while in the past I've expressed my admiration, great discipline, you know, I admire it so
[Amit Varma]: much that week after week, you can just have the discipline to sit down and put it out,
[Amit Varma]: especially because it's not just you sitting and writing, you're talking to people and
[Amit Varma]: you're constructing those and I really love that.
[Amit Varma]: But while I was aware, it was only when I read all the posts and I was taking notes
[Amit Varma]: that I thought that this is really a formidable body of work.
[Amit Varma]: So you should be so proud.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Let's let's sort of start by talking about you by now, you know, the template of the
[Amit Varma]: show.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's start by talking about sort of your personal journey, which is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a really unconventional sort of route that you've taken to to where you are, where you've
[Amit Varma]: done your engineering, you've done your MBA, you joined the civil services.
[Amit Varma]: And now while you are, of course, you know, working with the Swachh Bharat program and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, but at the same time, this newsletter is outstanding.
[Amit Varma]: It's just great.
[Amit Varma]: So you're part of the creator economy in a sense, you're doing a podcast as well.
[Amit Varma]: But take me back to where were you born, where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: How was that like?
[Guest]: Yeah, I've listened to a lot of episodes of your podcast and always wondered that how
[Guest]: how are people's lives so interesting, like people are reading books in in beside rivers
[Guest]: flowing behind their homes and all and I always felt like my upbringing was very, very average
[Guest]: by those standards.
[Guest]: But but we'll go there anyway.
[Guest]: So I'm basically from a partition refugee family.
[Guest]: My paternal grandparents were children or young adults when partition happened.
[Guest]: And so both of my Dada and Dadi have, they've told us stories about how they went through
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: My grandfather was in Xavier's Mumbai when partition happened and he was studying engineering
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And so his family was stuck beside beyond the border and he was here in India.
[Guest]: And so there was all of that anxiety in those days with no communication channel, whether
[Guest]: your loved ones are even okay, whether they're even alive.
[Guest]: My grandmother had this very, very, that in Hindi you say dil dehla dene wali story of
[Guest]: how they were.
[Guest]: She was one of 14 siblings.
[Guest]: They were all children.
[Guest]: They had a house in Lahore and there was a warehouse like go down under their house and
[Guest]: wahan pe they used to store bade bade bartano mein wheat and rice and things like that.
[Guest]: So how they as children hid inside those huge containers because the houses were being homes
[Guest]: were being raided and there were riots in the streets, of course, and Hindus are not
[Guest]: safe there.
[Guest]: Muslims are not safe here.
[Guest]: And so they hid in those gigantic containers for a week, 10 days, and they lived on eating
[Guest]: those raw grains of wheat and rice.
[Guest]: That's how they survived it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, suddenly news would come, ke ek train jaa rahi hai, chalo.
[Guest]: And aadi raat ko some children are going in one batch, some are going in the other.
[Guest]: And again, you don't know whether you're being separated from your siblings.
[Guest]: You don't know whether you'll even see them again.
[Guest]: So so very, very shocking, disturbing stories from there.
[Guest]: Then they came to Delhi and they settled here in a in a refugee colony.
[Guest]: I believe my grandmother was elsewhere and later when she got married, she moved in obviously
[Guest]: with my grandfather.
[Guest]: And my great grandmother was the matriarch of the family at the time.
[Guest]: I remember my dad still tells me the story of how at that time, you know, these refugee
[Guest]: colonies were being offered and unko koi, I don't know, a defense colony, ya kahin
[Guest]: Kalka ji kahin pe, she was getting a house.
[Guest]: And at that time, Delhi mein, it was like she, she literally refused that house saying
[Guest]: wahan jangal mein jaa ke kaun rahega.
[Guest]: And today my dad is like, if she had said yes at that time, our lives would have been
[Guest]: very different right now.
[Guest]: But anyway, so then she, so then she came, moved here with my grandfather who had one
[Guest]: sibling, my grandmother who had 13 siblings.
[Guest]: And then they got married, they had four sons, one of, third one was my father.
[Guest]: My mother's side again, four siblings, third one was my mother.
[Guest]: My mom's side is another interesting story of great struggle, I think.
[Guest]: So my mom's mother was again one of just two siblings, because my mom's grandfather passed
[Guest]: away very soon after his marriage to my great grandmother on that side, my great nani on
[Guest]: that side.
[Guest]: And I think it was a Spanish flu or something at that time, which took a lot of lives and
[Guest]: many young adults passed away suddenly.
[Guest]: And so many families were left with no parents or single parents.
[Guest]: And so my great nani was suddenly widowed at a very young age, she had two children
[Guest]: and she self educated herself and became actually a school principal, which at that time did
[Guest]: not take like a huge amount of education.
[Guest]: But even with basic education, you could become that.
[Guest]: And so she was a self made woman in that era, a woman who was in a job earning and raising
[Guest]: a family on her own, which was very, very admirable.
[Guest]: And then my nani had actually had nine children, which I found out much later in life, that
[Guest]: my mom had had five siblings who never made it beyond the first year of their life.
[Guest]: So I mean, when I think about it, I can't imagine how a parent, a mother says especially
[Guest]: goes on after losing five children and then going on to have more children.
[Guest]: But that was I guess the way of those times, you know, it was just a fact of life that
[Guest]: some children will not make it.
[Guest]: I mean, very common diseases like diarrhea and all, which today utterly preventable,
[Guest]: you take ORS, you will be fine.
[Guest]: At that time, children would actually lose lives and parents would lose children to that.
[Guest]: Anyway, so then after somehow, luckily after number six, she had four children who made
[Guest]: it and then my mom was the third of those four.
[Guest]: So I much later in life found out that my mom was actually number nine, not nine, seven,
[Guest]: eight.
[Guest]: Yes, we'll have to edit this.
[Guest]: So much later in life, I found out my mom was not the third child, she was actually
[Guest]: the eighth child in that family.
[Guest]: So yeah, then my parents, my dad, I think had his initial years of his education in
[Guest]: Kanpur, and then they moved back to Delhi, because my dadaji was an engineer and he used
[Guest]: to work in these repair of theatre equipment.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of travelling, because at that time in India, there were only so
[Guest]: many, single screen obviously, and there were very few of those.
[Guest]: So he used to travel a lot, be on tour a lot.
[Guest]: And so my dadi used to stay in Delhi at home with her, with the four boys.
[Guest]: I think both my parents had very humble beginnings, that way, I studied in a government school
[Guest]: and Hindi medium, they tell me stories of, you know, sitting on the floor in a broken
[Guest]: tent, and teachers are obviously not interested, and very few who would actually have a stake
[Guest]: in teaching at all, mostly just going through the motions.
[Guest]: But then they were, both of them had this very strong work ethic and this strong desire
[Guest]: to love for education.
[Guest]: So they kind of, again, were self-taught in a way.
[Guest]: My father ended up doing an MA in English, having come from a Hindi medium school, almost
[Guest]: overnight taught himself English.
[Guest]: By reading the dictionary, like that's how he would tell me that he would read a sentence
[Guest]: and then come across four new words in that sentence, and then go back to the dictionary
[Guest]: and look up their meaning and then read the next sentence.
[Guest]: So that's an intense amount of work to put into learning a language, but that's how,
[Guest]: that's how he did it.
[Guest]: And he went on to do an MA in English.
[Guest]: My mom also did a master's later in life and was a BA in the, when they got married.
[Guest]: They got married in 1985, and that's the year later that year I was born.
[Guest]: And then two years later, I had a younger brother.
[Guest]: I don't remember much from my early years, but I mostly grew up in Delhi.
[Guest]: And my parents were, like I said, you know, great love for education and despite humble
[Guest]: beginnings and both of them were bankers for most of my life.
[Guest]: They were in public sector banks and again transferable jobs.
[Guest]: So we used to change schools a lot, even within Delhi.
[Guest]: So in my life, in the 12 years of schooling, I've changed 10 schools.
[Guest]: So that's a significant amount of nomadic lifestyle to have.
[Guest]: But that was, I think it was good in hindsight and it was a little tough at that time maybe,
[Guest]: but it was, it was good.
[Guest]: I mean, it made me very comfortable and adjustable.
[Guest]: I would make friends easily.
[Guest]: I would settle in new circumstances easily.
[Guest]: And they used to, I mean, we went to the best of the schools, my brother and I.
[Guest]: My parents, again, like I said, love for education.
[Guest]: So that was very important to them.
[Guest]: It was a very important ethic that they built into us also that, you know, one is a love
[Guest]: for education.
[Guest]: And the other thing that they probably didn't teach us consciously, but we picked up was
[Guest]: value for money.
[Guest]: Because somehow, I don't, they never said it to us, but at least for me, I imbibed it
[Guest]: quite early in life that they are not, it's not easy for them to send me to this school.
[Guest]: They are making sacrifices and the least I can do is study well.
[Guest]: So I used to be like class topper all through school and everything, very, very boring,
[Guest]: typical Delhi type story.
[Guest]: And we used to have all these holidays, these classes, so we also became a bit of jack of
[Guest]: all trades.
[Guest]: We learned a bit of dancing, a bit of Bhadrat Natyam, a bit of Kathak, a bit of singing,
[Guest]: a bit of painting, a bit of this and that.
[Guest]: Like we would be shunted out of the house during summer.
[Guest]: So kind of picked up a lot of things alongside education, alongside academics early in life.
[Guest]: And then I think the big, I mean, it must have been skipping a lot of things here, but
[Guest]: I think the next big milestone happened in our lives when I was in 10th standard.
[Guest]: I mean, in Delhi, it starts after 9th, no more going downstairs to play, less of friends,
[Guest]: now focus on studies, the year of the board exam is coming, so prepare for 10th in 9th,
[Guest]: write the board in 10th, then prepare for 12th in 11th, then write the board in 12th.
[Guest]: So that is basically, and the story you were told was that if you study these two years,
[Guest]: then your life is set.
[Guest]: Of course, that story carries on later also, that if you do this entrance, then your life
[Guest]: is set.
[Guest]: Then if you write that exam, then your life is set.
[Guest]: That goes on, but at that time, obviously, you are children and you fall for this, fall
[Guest]: for this pitch.
[Guest]: So we, so I was like very hardcore 10th is like, this is the do or die year of life.
[Guest]: And in that year, some leadership change happened in my mom's bank.
[Guest]: And until that time, they had a policy of not transferring women, because they were
[Guest]: like working mothers have it tough enough as it is, let's not make life worse for them.
[Guest]: Already the husbands are moving around, and they have to adjust with that.
[Guest]: A lot of years, I grew up with my dad living in some village in UP, and then commuting
[Guest]: every week to come see us.
[Guest]: Aisa hota tha bahut.
[Guest]: So my mom was like the one fixture ke theek hai, she is going to be in Delhi, she is going
[Guest]: to be in this house.
[Guest]: So we don't have to change schools as often.
[Guest]: But then that year, when I was in 10th, there was a leadership change in her organization.
[Guest]: And the man who came in was, was for some reason had a bone to pick with women.
[Guest]: He said, transfer all the women, bahut ho gaya, baithi hoon hi hain kap, ek hi jaga pe.
[Guest]: So usne utha ke, sabko, and not even like transfer them locally, from one Delhi office
[Guest]: to another, or within departments, no, transfer them to other cities, where they've never
[Guest]: been and don't want to go.
[Guest]: So my mom was transferred to Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: So suddenly, like I said, humara pura plan tha na, ke 9th to 12th, ghar mein cable TV
[Guest]: kat jayega, baith ke padhai karni hai.
[Guest]: And then the plan got disrupted in the most crucial year.
[Guest]: So my dad, to his credit at the time, said that, you know, this is a crucial year for
[Guest]: Mahima's education, and we need to keep the family together.
[Guest]: Because earlier we went by ourselves, and it was a huge struggle for my mother to manage
[Guest]: the new house, new culture, bachchon ke nahi school, her own new office, her own office
[Guest]: ka dynamics and politics.
[Guest]: It was just too much for her to do by herself.
[Guest]: And she would every day tell him, when are you coming here?
[Guest]: And so to his huge credit, he took VRS in a year that, it was like quite early in his
[Guest]: career at that time.
[Guest]: So people would tell him ke, oh, you're making the biggest mistake of your life.
[Guest]: And he was like, nahi, my family needs me, and he prioritized that.
[Guest]: Again, a very, very, very modern take for a, decision for a man to take at that time,
[Guest]: that I will quit my job and my wife will continue to earn, because she doesn't have the option
[Guest]: of VRS right now.
[Guest]: So she would have to resign and just sit at home with no pay, I will at least get a pension.
[Guest]: So theek hai.
[Guest]: And I'll do something of my own.
[Guest]: So he did that, which was massive, a huge sacrifice for which I'm indebted forever,
[Guest]: because again, something that could have changed the direction of our lives completely.
[Guest]: So he came and joined us in Ahmedabad, and I suffered a lot in terms of academics and
[Guest]: to the extent that a 10th standard child can suffer, basically.
[Guest]: Huge culture shift, children in my school suddenly speaking Gujarati and telling me
[Guest]: I have a Punjabi accent, which until that time, no one had pointed out because, well,
[Guest]: I guess all of us had Punjabi accents, so no one points it out.
[Guest]: But then when I go there, they say, oh, the way you say this thing, this is very Punjabi,
[Guest]: this is very Delhi type.
[Guest]: So I would be very conscious about the way I speak.
[Guest]: I was the new kid in a class, in a school where 10th standard was the last class.
[Guest]: Toh wo bachche KG se saath mein padhte hua rahe the, and I am suddenly middle of the
[Guest]: year, airdropped into this classroom where nobody knows me and nobody cares at this stage
[Guest]: of their life to make new friends.
[Guest]: So very difficult adjustment, and I was this cocky class topper, teacher's pet in Delhi
[Guest]: school, toh Delhi mein my school so far.
[Guest]: So I was like completely out of my comfort zone, my marks plummeted and like I said again,
[Guest]: the most life-defining crucial do or die year of my life, and my brother was having his
[Guest]: own set of issues, he was getting bullied by the boys in his class.
[Guest]: And so we had a very difficult adjustment that year.
[Guest]: That year also, there was floods in Gujarat, in Ahmedabad, and our school was in a low-lying
[Guest]: area.
[Guest]: So I remember school ka poora ground floor tak paani bhar gaya, we were all moved to the
[Guest]: first floor, and then first floor mein paani bharne lagya.
[Guest]: So then some army people came and humko utha, waha se rassi baand ke, nikaal ke leke gaye,
[Guest]: and we were evacuated.
[Guest]: So that was my first brush with natural disasters.
[Guest]: So anyway, lot of stuff happened, and by God's grace or hard work, parents, blessings, everything,
[Guest]: I actually ended up topping West India that year.
[Guest]: From going from like 68% marks ho gaye the meri, I was this always, 95 se upar rahe na
[Guest]: chahiye.
[Guest]: 90 bhi nahi, 95 se upar aana chahiye.
[Guest]: Maths mein 25 mein se 24 and a half kyun aaye, half mark kahan kata?
[Guest]: That was the big, big pain points of my life were those, until that year.
[Guest]: From that year, I came down to like academics mein kahi nahi, all, everything changed suddenly,
[Guest]: and which was, again, in hindsight, I think it was a change that I needed.
[Guest]: It was a reality check that I needed, like I said, I was getting rather comfortable and
[Guest]: cocky in Delhi.
[Guest]: Toh 10th hua, phir then 11th mein changed into state board, Gujarat board, went there
[Guest]: for 10 days and decided ke yeh toh bhai, these textbooks are like 100 pages and I'm not going
[Guest]: to, this is not okay.
[Guest]: I'm not going to fit in here.
[Guest]: So then I got to, came back into central board, Kendra Vidyalaya, then 12th mein ek aur school
[Guest]: badla.
[Guest]: I did a bit of IIT prep over there, which again, Ahmedabad had no coaching classes or
[Guest]: anything at that time.
[Guest]: So there was this one class and I remember I went, I joined there, woh nahi nahi khuli
[Guest]: thi and I went there, first day I sat next to a boy and I was like, you know, looking
[Guest]: for validation, have I come to the right place even?
[Guest]: So I asked this guy that, you know, what do you know about this class, why did you choose
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: This, and then he was like, this is the best class in Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: I said, why?
[Guest]: He said, don't you know, Mahima Vashishth comes to this class and I was like, what?
[Guest]: Because I had topped West India na, akbaar wagar mein naam chhap gaya tha mera.
[Guest]: And then somehow word travelled that I had joined this class.
[Guest]: And then I realised that people are here because I am here, I don't know why I am here.
[Guest]: So we are all in one boat, sink or swim and basically we sank, that boat sank because
[Guest]: I didn't clear IIT.
[Guest]: Like I cleared and I got some like 6000 rank or something, which at that time would have
[Guest]: given you mining engineering in one, bahut door ka koi college and so that was not it.
[Guest]: And then I also gave AIEEE, I also gave medical because I had bio also, lot of, har jagah
[Guest]: haath pyaar maara and finally I got into AIEEE ek exam, ussi saal start hua tha, the All-India
[Guest]: Engineering Entrance Examination.
[Guest]: And until then, that year you had to apply separately to every college you wanted to
[Guest]: go into.
[Guest]: So if you, there are 50 colleges, big, big league colleges, you have to fill 50 application
[Guest]: forms and write 50 exams.
[Guest]: So thankfully from my year only it had started and I wrote that exam and I got into an NIT,
[Guest]: National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra.
[Guest]: Usse upar rank mein the, uss samay bhi and NIT Surat was local for us, Gujarat mein.
[Guest]: And NIT Allahabad, I remember was one of the highest ranked and I could have, with my marks
[Guest]: and rank, I could have gotten into it and I remember my parents, we went to that counselling
[Guest]: centre jahan pe yeh diya jata hai, aapko yeh branch aur yeh NIT mil raha hai.
[Guest]: And waha jaa ke we had applied and the counselling centre guy told us ki dekho, NIT Allahabad
[Guest]: is good, but ladkiyon ke liye theek nahi hai, waha pe pathar chalte hain, waha pe bachche
[Guest]: exam hall mein chhuri leke aa jaate hain.
[Guest]: So that was enough for my parents, okay, good career but thanks, no thanks.
[Guest]: So they put me in the next best at the time which was NIT Kurukshetra.
[Guest]: So then I went for the first time, left my home and lot of rona dhona in the train I
[Guest]: remember to Kurukshetra and then my dad took me there, dropped me off, got me a hostel
[Guest]: room and everything and then four years of engineering happened there, where it was,
[Guest]: it was nice, it was very nice, at that time at least because academically I was good,
[Guest]: I was sorted because I had had all this rigorous background of studying and I was good at cracking
[Guest]: exams.
[Guest]: So aa jaate the acche number, I used to be again topper popper in all semesters.
[Guest]: But more than that, what I really liked about that experience was the kind of grooming that
[Guest]: it was for my personality, I joined a lot of, I was the chief editor of the college
[Guest]: magazine, technical society mein, executive member, matlab aisa extracurricular bahut
[Guest]: kuch.
[Guest]: I used to play sports, I used to be cultural events, kuch na kuch.
[Guest]: So I was always busy, I was always up to something and it was again at that time very uncharacteristic
[Guest]: for a girl to be this active in these things because it was, you know, quizzing is boys
[Guest]: ka area, literature and debate club is boys ka area, magazine likhna is boys ka area.
[Guest]: And so I was this outsider who was, they would select girls in these clubs, but mostly it
[Guest]: was seen as eye candy, ki chalo thodi ladkiya bhi leke aatein club mein.
[Guest]: And then by the time of, by the senior years, most girls would peter out in participation
[Guest]: because there was no, really no support from the organization, from the institution or
[Guest]: from the culture within the students also.
[Guest]: It was not very friendly for girls.
[Guest]: So I remember there was, we used to have a girls' hostel and usmein girls' timing was
[Guest]: like 4.30 ko lectures khatam hua hai, 5.30 tak aapko andar hona hai.
[Guest]: So basically you had one hour to go eat a samosa in the canteen and enjoy campus life
[Guest]: as it were.
[Guest]: And for boys, obviously, puri raat campus mein yahaan pe daru leke peeke padha hua hain
[Guest]: and they're like living it up there.
[Guest]: Not that daru is the measure of living it up, but the access to that public space, after
[Guest]: hours to go sit outside college library and, you know, have all those memories, build those
[Guest]: memories which people look back on.
[Guest]: We got no such chances because we were sheep, cattle herded into the hostel at sundown.
[Guest]: So summers ke time thodo zyada time milta tha, winters mein toh bas class khatam hui,
[Guest]: ek ghante ke andar sunset ho jayega, aap chalo bhaago.
[Guest]: That I felt it was very, very restrictive and in hindsight it was quite misogynistic
[Guest]: because the wardens and their attitude was ki yeh jagah safe nahi hai ladkiyon ke liye.
[Guest]: Haryana hai, yahaan pe ladkiyan chhed dete hain, yahaan pe ladkiyon ko utha ke le jate
[Guest]: hain, hum aapko nahi jaane de sakte bhaar.
[Guest]: Aapki betiyaan humari zimmedaari hain and they would tell our parents ki aap socho,
[Guest]: main inki parent ki tarah soch rahi hu, agar meri beti hoti toh main yeh karti.
[Guest]: And I was like, well, we are living on campus.
[Guest]: This is your area.
[Guest]: If you are not able to protect a student in this area, that's on you.
[Guest]: That's not on the student.
[Guest]: You cannot penalize the student because she happens to be a girl.
[Guest]: But anyway, at that time, we didn't have such voice and khudi apne andar itni internalized
[Guest]: misogyny thi ki hum accept bhi khale the ki haan bhai yeh hi sahi, yeh aise hi life hai.
[Guest]: So I remember for college magazine printing waqara karane ke liye, I used to go aadi raat
[Guest]: ko printer ki shop pe and tell yahaan pe ki, Karnal mein meri maasi hai, wo bimaar hai,
[Guest]: mujh unke dekhne jaana hai, aise karke I used to write these applications, get it signed
[Guest]: by a friend as my aunt or local guardian or something, and then give it to the warden.
[Guest]: And the warden also often would see through it.
[Guest]: She'd be like, haan mujhe pata hai yeh kaunsi maasi hai, Karnal mujhe baar baar bimaar hoti
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: We have a maasi in Karnal.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: I have no one in Karnal.
[Guest]: It was just the nearest town.
[Guest]: So anyway, I mean, she, I think she thought I was going out with a boy or something, which
[Guest]: was where their mind always went.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of slut shaming, unneedlessly, ki aap, matlab literally, I was a student
[Guest]: going out to participate in an extracurricular college campus activity, which was benefiting
[Guest]: me, benefiting the campus.
[Guest]: It is a part of the kind of all round development that you should be offering your students,
[Guest]: you should be encouraging in your students, but instead you are penalizing them, you're
[Guest]: slut shaming them, you're telling them ki aadi raat ko ladkiya andher mein jaake kya
[Guest]: karti hain ladko ke saath humein pata hai.
[Guest]: This is literally a line that the chief warden has told me.
[Guest]: These were the, that was the kind of atmosphere where you had to really, this is also the
[Guest]: reason why most girls would peter out of clubs and societies and all, right?
[Guest]: For me, it was just a passion and I was, I found a lot of meaning and joy in that.
[Guest]: So I used to, I used to find my ways around it.
[Guest]: So that, all that happened, four years of college went out that way.
[Guest]: In hindsight, again, much more misogyny that I see there now than I saw at that time, which
[Guest]: was probably good for my mental health that I didn't see it that time, otherwise, krantikari
[Guest]: ban jate hoon, chaar saal tak mein moorchai nikalti rehti.
[Guest]: The atmosphere in Gurukshetra was also very, I mean, it had all sorts of other issues also.
[Guest]: There's a lot of toxic masculinity also, literally, there were boys in our college who would go
[Guest]: out in the evening on bikes and, malab ladki jaariya peeche se uske baal kheechke chale
[Guest]: gaye, pen chhen liya, knock off her books or something, you know, just like, it was
[Guest]: harmless words like, if teasing are used for it, it is sexual harassment.
[Guest]: And that was very common on campus, more from the boys who would come from outside than
[Guest]: the boys from within campus, but everyone had access and everyone, Gurukshetra University
[Guest]: is like a thousand acre campus in which 300 acres is NIT Gurukshetra, within the campus.
[Guest]: So Gurukshetra University, KAU bolte the, KAU ke ladke andar aate the, KAU ke ladko
[Guest]: ko hamare naam, details, phone number pata hote the, like, men we've never met, don't
[Guest]: know that they exist, they know everything about our lives.
[Guest]: So that was the extent of scrutiny that girls would be under in that surrounding.
[Guest]: And there was, like I said, a lot of toxic masculinity in our third year, I think I was
[Guest]: in third year, when there was an incident of violence between boys.
[Guest]: So there were gangs of boys there and one gang beat up the other gang or they, somebody
[Guest]: brought a hockey stick and somebody brought a fawda, spade.
[Guest]: And so this was, became famous as the fawda incident on campus, ke ek ladke ne doose ladke
[Guest]: ka sar khol diya fawda maarke.
[Guest]: And basically that boy, I think he later survived, but he had some lifelong paralysis or some
[Guest]: issue, obviously, like literally his head was cracked open by another student.
[Guest]: So that was the extent of stuff that the boys on campus were dealing.
[Guest]: So credit to them also where it belongs.
[Guest]: And I remember there was a long break, suddenly humari chhutiyan kar di gayi, we were sent
[Guest]: home and some boys went underground and they had parents who were Haryana ka IPS officer,
[Guest]: uska father hai and then somehow he was bailed out, the guy who did this and all of that
[Guest]: weird parallel universe also existed while I was working on my magazines and clubs and
[Guest]: little cute little things.
[Guest]: That was a context and general scene in which Kurukshetra happened.
[Guest]: Towards the end, in my final year, I got placed into campus placement, say I got two jobs,
[Guest]: but then I also wrote CAT in that year.
[Guest]: And again, it was very unlikely that I would have cleared it because no, no coaching class
[Guest]: again in Kurukshetra.
[Guest]: So I did this distance wala mock test thing, time ka usam hota tha and lot of my batchmates
[Guest]: used to had just given up on studies and extracurriculars in the final year ke rose train leke weekend
[Guest]: pe Delhi jaake career launcher ki class mein padha hi karke aayenge and I was here till
[Guest]: the last day running around organizing fests and everything in college as the final year
[Guest]: student who was still not given that legitimacy because I was a girl, we'll come back to that
[Guest]: later.
[Guest]: But there was in the final year, yeah, I used to go, I used to do this distance thing for
[Guest]: mock tests, and then I was the surprise candidate who cleared CAT.
[Guest]: And then toh fir isliye I didn't join any job and I went on to IIM Bangalore after that
[Guest]: right after campus.
[Guest]: IIM Bangalore was a whole other universe because like I said, Kurukshetra mein academically
[Guest]: I was very, very comfortable.
[Guest]: By the end of it, I had a 9.9 CGP out of 10, which was log sunte hain toh aankhe fad jati
[Guest]: hain.
[Guest]: But for me, I feel like I was actually not that hard because like I said, I had become
[Guest]: quite good at cracking the Indian education system.
[Guest]: Toh mujhe pada tha exam mein kaisa poochenge, how to do smart prep the night before the
[Guest]: exam and then the night after the exam, I would press a reset button, so today I cannot
[Guest]: tell you what a microprocessor is with a gun to my head.
[Guest]: So that was, I am an electronics engineer by the way, so that's quite shameful to admit.
[Guest]: I went into IIM Bangalore after that.
[Guest]: Wahape, it was a whole other, academic comfort se coming there was a very different experience
[Guest]: because wahape saare ek topper the, wahape toh yeh tha ki bhai pattar peko topper ko
[Guest]: lagega.
[Guest]: So it was, everybody there was exceptional people academically at least, but probably
[Guest]: not as diverse.
[Guest]: So we were a batch of 249 people out of which 227 were engineers.
[Guest]: So we all, we, different degrees of genius, but all thinking the same way, sabka dimaag
[Guest]: train ki tarah ek hi line pe chalta hai.
[Guest]: So I think there were like less than 20 or so people from arts and yeh sab background
[Guest]: who were just brought in for diversity, usse mein yeh hota tha ki is cheez ke marks zyada
[Guest]: milte hain, ki agar aapne CAT kar liya aur aapka arts background hai, toh wo aapko zyada
[Guest]: marks denge interviewer kyunki they want that diversity on campus, but obviously we were
[Guest]: not doing a good enough job of diversity because we are still very, very engineering dominated.
[Guest]: So I would actually love interacting with those students who came from different backgrounds
[Guest]: because they brought a very different way of thinking to things.
[Guest]: And I was a fresher, which, what is called a fresher, which is that no work experience,
[Guest]: directly engineering ke baad MBA.
[Guest]: So I also got a lot of different life perspectives from my batchmates who had work experience
[Guest]: because they would have this attitude of yeh sab se kuch fark nahi padta hai, humne dekha
[Guest]: hai real life mein, whereas the freshers like us were like, areh marks, areh exam, areh
[Guest]: yeh.
[Guest]: So I kind of evolved beyond that because I surrounded myself with friends who didn't
[Guest]: care as much about academics and about all of that.
[Guest]: So we did decently well, passably okay in IIM, I was no, no gold medalist there.
[Guest]: I went on in student exchange while there in my, they were, doh saal mein there are
[Guest]: three trimesters, so, sorry, six trimesters.
[Guest]: So fifth trimester is a student exchange program, which I did in Germany, in a college, B school
[Guest]: in Germany.
[Guest]: So for me, that was the highlight of my MBA, ke I got to travel abroad and live in another
[Guest]: country in a rented apartment with other students and hum log, we were like the only 16 Indians
[Guest]: in a hundred kilometer radius around there.
[Guest]: So hum log milke chole chawal bana rahe hain, raat ko to get a taste of our food and learnt
[Guest]: how to cook, learnt how to manage a household to the extent a student does.
[Guest]: And I was, I did a lot of traveling, I traveled like to like some 11 countries.
[Guest]: So again, academics was the last thing on our mind, ke ye to hoyi jaayega.
[Guest]: And I remember humara jab exam hua tha waha pe, toh Indian students were leaving so fast
[Guest]: because like we have been conditioned to game the education system so well that the poor
[Guest]: Germans, agar teen mahina pehle project diya hai, toh wo log teen mahine ka ek wo banayenge,
[Guest]: poora timeline chart, ke pehle hafte hum ye karenge, doosra hafta we will visualize,
[Guest]: teesra hafta we will find data, chautha hafta we will do primary research for this.
[Guest]: And Indians are like, ye deadline kab hai, ek raat pehle baithenge, night out maarenge,
[Guest]: ho jaayega.
[Guest]: Sounds just like me, I gotta tell you.
[Guest]: I know, you did that right, like last night baithke moomaning padha hai poora.
[Amit Varma]: Siddhi si baat hai, kya karein.
[Guest]: So humara culture woh hai, toh we kind of were like, all of us were the worst project
[Guest]: partners, it became like a racist thing almost, ki Indians ko project partner mat banao, they'll
[Guest]: turn up one night before the thing, whereas those, I mean German, French, even Chinese
[Guest]: sincere students are there slogging for three months, aur hum ek raat pehle prakat hoke
[Guest]: bolenge, chalo, batao meri kitni slides hai.
[Guest]: Anyway, so we were, the joke was that on that day when we were all writing the exam, the
[Guest]: Indian students were leaving so fast that the examiner stopped one of us and was like,
[Guest]: show me your wallet, and you have definitely cheated, how are you leaving so fast?
[Guest]: And he was like, I haven't, like literally, I know the answers, jutta mujhe pata hai surface
[Guest]: hai, main lik diya hai, aur mujhe pata hai main pass ho jaunga, itte main.
[Guest]: And pretty much that was the attitude of all of us there, satisficing to the worst level,
[Guest]: in the worst way possible.
[Guest]: So yeah, the education and all was secondary there, but the cross-cultural experience was
[Guest]: very, very, was very interesting, and I think that contributed much more to our growth.
[Amit Varma]: Let's double click on a few things and then we'll rejoin this journey.
[Amit Varma]: So a whole bunch of things to double click on, I want to go back to when you were talking
[Amit Varma]: at the start about how you learned about, you know, the experiences of your grandparents
[Amit Varma]: during partition and all of that, and how they came over and what they went through.
[Amit Varma]: And I've also sort of been thinking for a long time, and it's a thought that came up
[Amit Varma]: again when I read your post, is that women always have this sort of extra layer of obstacles
[Amit Varma]: to overcome to get to whatever they're doing.
[Amit Varma]: I remember I'd done this episode I really enjoyed with Kavita Rao, who'd written about
[Amit Varma]: the lady doctors of the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: And some of the stories that are stunning, like the one that moved me a lot, and I keep
[Amit Varma]: going back to is that of Hemabati Sen, who was born in this village somewhere in what
[Amit Varma]: was then Bangladesh in the 1840s or 1850s, right?
[Amit Varma]: She was married off to a middle-aged widower at the age of nine.
[Amit Varma]: During the day, she would play with his children.
[Amit Varma]: During the night, she would forget what happened, but basically she would wake up naked and
[Amit Varma]: bleeding, right?
[Amit Varma]: This went on for a couple of years until her husband died, his parents died, her parents
[Amit Varma]: died.
[Amit Varma]: So she's 11 years old, and her family basically kicks her out on the street and she's got
[Amit Varma]: no money.
[Amit Varma]: So parents are dead, both sets of parents, husband is dead, you'd imagine life is over.
[Amit Varma]: She's 11 years old, no money, village in Bangladesh, right, 1850s.
[Amit Varma]: She makes her way from there to be one of India's first lady doctors.
[Amit Varma]: And she achieves positions of eminence in terms of the first woman head of a guild or
[Amit Varma]: whatever I forgot in the details.
[Amit Varma]: She writes a diary about her life.
[Amit Varma]: And after she dies, that diary is lost in a trunk, which isn't open for 85 years.
[Amit Varma]: And then in the 1990s or the early 2000s, somebody opens it and it's published as a
[Amit Varma]: memoirs of Hemabati Sen, you can, you know, read it online.
[Amit Varma]: And not just this story, because one story can be an outlier.
[Amit Varma]: But reading about the lady doctors of the 1900s, what struck me was that to be a lady
[Amit Varma]: doctor at all, forget how good a doctor forget what you achieve, just to be a lady doctor,
[Amit Varma]: you had to be ridiculously outstanding, you had to have immense character, immense strength,
[Amit Varma]: you had to have overcome a lot.
[Amit Varma]: While to be a male doctor, you simply had to be born into privilege, basically, right
[Amit Varma]: time, right place, good things happen, you kind of get there, you could be mediocre.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in your stories, you know, what you've written in your newsletter is that
[Amit Varma]: time and again, you know, I was reading stories of ordinary women, who on the face of it seem
[Amit Varma]: ordinary, that their lives are ordinary, nothing special about them, you know, normal job karte
[Amit Varma]: hai, ek do bachche hai, ghar chalate hai, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But then you go into one, you go into the interior lives to a fair extent.
[Amit Varma]: And two, you make us realize that their existence isn't so ordinary, that they have so many
[Amit Varma]: more odds to beat than a comparable male.
[Amit Varma]: So just going, you know, circling back to your grandparents, for example, and thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud over there, how did they cope?
[Amit Varma]: And is it that the women coped differently, or coped better?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, they could kind of, they carried that burden in a different way?
[Amit Varma]: Were there different kinds of denial that might have set in for the men or the women?
[Amit Varma]: Because one common way that I can just think for men to deal with it is a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of macho denial, you know, and some of that could also, you know, involve just running
[Amit Varma]: away from what just happened, or, you know, not facing up to that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just sort of, I see this, you know, I'm applying this thread that I've seen go
[Amit Varma]: through.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so my question, therefore, is that, now looking back in hindsight, do
[Amit Varma]: you feel that the women coped with it differently?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that some of that toughness also rubbed off on you?
[Amit Varma]: Because even a little thing like, you know, inventing a maasi in Karnal, to kind of get
[Amit Varma]: out, is also a way of fighting back, of saying ki nahi, mai nahi loongi, mujhe jaana hai,
[Amit Varma]: mujhe karna hai, right?
[Amit Varma]: Did some of it rub off from there as well?
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of observations on that broad subject?
[Amit Varma]: And how much of it, you know, could you see in this particular instance of your grandparents
[Amit Varma]: and your parents and what they kind of, you know, go through to just to just live their
[Amit Varma]: lives, like even your mother getting transferred like that, obviously, that boss in Delhi would
[Amit Varma]: have been some toxic asshole.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so what are your observations now, looking back?
[Guest]: Two things.
[Guest]: One, I obviously come from strong women, which is now clear to me in hindsight, which was
[Guest]: not a recurring, you know, undercurrent of my life that every day I'm waking up and thinking,
[Guest]: wow, what strong women around me, but I mean, strong women was not even a thing that was
[Guest]: even recognized or let alone celebrated in the time that we grew up in.
[Guest]: And I mean, let alone the time before that, humare dada, dadi, nana, nani ke time pe toh,
[Guest]: it wasn't even a thing.
[Guest]: It was just a given that, yes, my dadaji will travel across the country, going to all these
[Guest]: theatres and I imagine having a good circle of friends and to meet in every city and hang
[Guest]: out with.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, my dadi is at home raising these four boys by herself and my dad tells me stories
[Guest]: of how, you know, she would have to take, literally, woh jo movie mein nahi dikhate hain, ke woh
[Guest]: sahookar ke paas aurat jaati hai, ke anaaj de do thoda sa aur woh bolta hai, ke tumhara
[Guest]: account settle karo pehle.
[Guest]: And then that filmy scenes that they show in purane zawaani ki movies, that's what their
[Guest]: life was like.
[Guest]: Like she would, by the time my dadaji would come back from tour and he's not in a salary
[Guest]: job that every month money is coming into the account, so by the time he would come
[Guest]: back from tour, that's when he would bring the money, but by that time, the stocks in
[Guest]: the house were at zero, ke ghar mein ghee khatam hai, tel khatam hai, chawal khatam hai, dhaan
[Guest]: khatam hai, sab kuch.
[Guest]: So, and we're basically, they are living in debt of all the local sahookars and all.
[Guest]: And so, my grandmother was dealing with all of that.
[Guest]: Then my grandfather would come and settle all the debts and then suddenly they would
[Guest]: live a very happy life for, until the next tour began.
[Guest]: Obviously, a very strong woman who was practically single parenting her children while the husband
[Guest]: is away.
[Guest]: Again, like I said about, talked about my nani giving birth to child after child, losing,
[Guest]: despite losing children, an immense amount of pain, trauma, grief, I can't even imagine
[Guest]: what all she went through.
[Guest]: My par nani who lost her husband so young and then goes on to become a school principal
[Guest]: and raise her children by herself, doesn't remarry and is a strong independent woman
[Guest]: in that sense.
[Guest]: My par dadi also was widowed early and she also was like, she raised my dada and his
[Guest]: sister herself for the most part.
[Guest]: These are all, obviously, I come from a stock of strength, of strong women.
[Guest]: My mother's life, when I think about it, I think I was a very thankless child when
[Guest]: I was growing up, as most children are, which is, I guess, understandable, forgivable up
[Guest]: to a certain age.
[Guest]: But I was very thankless in hindsight and I didn't appreciate the life she led, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: She would literally get up at 5am, bachchon ka khana, husband ka khana, dabba office
[Guest]: ka, apna dabba office ka, phir then my dad is waking up later and having his morning
[Guest]: tea and then bachchon ko subah, mallab I would sleep while brushing my teeth, then I would
[Guest]: sleep in the loo, then I would sleep in the bathroom.
[Guest]: So, she had to come and wake me up 20 times in the morning, within the span of one hour.
[Guest]: Again, in hindsight, now I know what a thankless and useless liability of a child I was.
[Guest]: But at the time, it feels like natural, ke haan yeh, toh mummi ka kaam hai, mummi kar
[Guest]: rahi hain.
[Guest]: But now, when you think about it, she's also a working woman.
[Guest]: She's also doing her job, going to office, dealing with colleagues and everything.
[Guest]: Then shaam ko ghar aa rahi hain, again raat ko dinner wahegar bana rahe mein lagi hain
[Guest]: and raat ko 12 baje tak, she's on her feet in the kitchen, helping.
[Guest]: We had a bit of domestic help, but it wasn't, I mean, there were still these notions of
[Guest]: which, in my parents' house, it's still true, ke mummi ke haath ka khaana hi banega.
[Guest]: Toh haan, theek hai, they'll be help, but ultimately, khaana toh mummi ke haath ka banega,
[Guest]: roti hain toh garam-garam hone chahiye, jo utarti-utarti roti, those concepts are still
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: So, she was living in that reality and, I mean, I don't think she was even feeling
[Guest]: oppressed or anything.
[Guest]: Again, in that age, these were all accepted as facts of life.
[Guest]: This is how life is.
[Guest]: And so, her generation, particularly, I felt was very sandwiched because up until then,
[Guest]: women were mostly housewives.
[Guest]: I mean, not to take credit away from stay-at-home mothers who have an incredibly challenging
[Guest]: life of their own, but this was one generation where women said, no, I also want to work.
[Guest]: And society said, okay, go and work, but not at the cost of everything else you were already
[Guest]: doing.
[Guest]: So, in my generation, I am, my work or my womaning or whatever I choose to do with my
[Guest]: life is the primary thing.
[Guest]: And then, my house is still, a lot of it is still on me, but I am not physically standing
[Guest]: in the kitchen cooking rotis every day.
[Guest]: So, in our generation, we have been offloaded some of that burden, at least the physical
[Guest]: part.
[Guest]: I mean, the workload is still large, but the physical part of that labor is of our generation,
[Guest]: at least in our social economic band.
[Guest]: So, humare liye, that burden has been reduced.
[Guest]: And one generation above, their burden of going to office was not there.
[Guest]: But this generation in the middle, my mom's generation and my mother-in-law's generation
[Guest]: and all of our moms, they had to do this double whammy, bahar jao kaam karne, but you have
[Guest]: to earn that right back by also not letting anything slip at home.
[Guest]: So, you are doing the job of the last generation also and the next generation also and together
[Guest]: as one person, which is, to me, inhuman.
[Guest]: Like, when I think about it now, I feel like my mom's life, I can never live that life.
[Guest]: It was so hard.
[Guest]: And we were thankless at that time about it, but now when I think about it, yes, I do come
[Guest]: from strong women and it's a pity that we did not celebrate this sooner and did not
[Guest]: recognize them and not just celebrate them, but, you know, make their life a little easier
[Guest]: than it was.
[Guest]: It was much harder than it needed to be.
[Amit Varma]: So, my next question, again, sort of goes back to something you said and, in fact, goes
[Amit Varma]: back to something I used to observe about my father and it kind of made me amused and
[Amit Varma]: simultaneously ashamed at myself for being amused, which is that, you know, and he was,
[Amit Varma]: of course, lived a privileged life in the sense IAS officer, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: In his old age, I remember whenever he'd visit me in Bombay, I'd take him to the Marriott
[Amit Varma]: for breakfast because he loved the buffet spread there and he would eat everything.
[Amit Varma]: He would try every single thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: If anybody is offering anything for free, he wants it.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it amusing.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, at the same time, the rational explanation for it is that our parents grew
[Amit Varma]: up in times of relative scarcity, you know, kuch bhi aasan nahi tha, you know, there wasn't
[Amit Varma]: an abundance of anything.
[Amit Varma]: So you valued whatever you've got and you had this culture of never wasting anything,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that old cliche of people are starving in China, so finish what you got, right?
[Guest]: Somalia.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a lyric from a John Lennon song also, I forget which one was it, Working Class
[Amit Varma]: Hero or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So it came from that sort of scarcity mindset, whereas we can take all of that stuff for
[Amit Varma]: granted.
[Amit Varma]: And if I'm not finishing my food, I can, you know, I can get all rational and say, arre
[Amit Varma]: sunk cost fallacy and this and that, we can get into that stuff, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you point out, and this is something that many guests of mine have spoken about with
[Amit Varma]: regard to their parents and their grandparents, that hunger for education, ki education karna
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: And their parents were so educated, you know, they kind of instilled that in you as well,
[Amit Varma]: that it meant a big deal, ki class mein topper banna hai, 90 nahi chalega, 95 chahiye, mera
[Amit Varma]: aadha maa kahan gaya, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you start caring about this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm again, tying it in with another observation I made recently, where I was at a conference
[Amit Varma]: organized by some investors who are investing in very unconventional ways and people around
[Amit Varma]: the country, and they brought together a whole bunch of entrepreneurs, including people who
[Amit Varma]: were like 17 and 18.
[Amit Varma]: And my observation there was that number one, these young people are mind blowing, they're
[Amit Varma]: a different level.
[Amit Varma]: But number two, and this is something I strongly believe is that real change in India in any
[Amit Varma]: field, you know, will come from the small towns, it will come from hungry young people
[Amit Varma]: in small towns, because they want it more, they have a better work ethic, and they have
[Amit Varma]: bigger dreams, they're not constrained as much by conventional thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just tying all of this together, and wondering if it is, therefore, that background
[Amit Varma]: at last really plays a big part that if you grow up with a certain kind of scarcity, you
[Amit Varma]: don't take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: We don't have a scarcity of information out there, there's an abundance of it.
[Amit Varma]: But we take it for granted by spending all our time on Twitter, and, you know, doing
[Amit Varma]: other matar ghashti or whatever it is, right?
[Amit Varma]: We are not taking advantage of that.
[Amit Varma]: If you gave the internet to our parents, I think matlab chaar din mein toh daddy poora
[Amit Varma]: internet pad lete, you know, because that hunger was there, which came from scarcity.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of thoughts on this, in the sense that you came from a background
[Amit Varma]: where you didn't take this stuff for granted, right?
[Amit Varma]: You had to work for it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, even when you had one bad year in school, you just, you know, got down to it,
[Amit Varma]: topped the West Zone or whatever you topped the next year, you kind of got it done.
[Amit Varma]: So in your observation through your own life, and perhaps even through doing this newsletter,
[Amit Varma]: you've met so many people of varied backgrounds and all of that, how much would you say this
[Amit Varma]: matters that, you know, your background matters, your class matters, all of this really shapes
[Amit Varma]: who you are and what you are like, if you were born in a really rich family, and you
[Amit Varma]: were chilling and doing holidays in Switzerland, I suspect you would have been a very different
[Amit Varma]: person.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so so what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because you meet and talk to many, many more people than I do, you know, from much more
[Amit Varma]: diverse backgrounds.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know exactly how to answer that.
[Guest]: But my thoughts on generally background is that, yeah, we are all a product of our background,
[Guest]: our experiences, to a very large extent, yes, there is free will and choice in there.
[Guest]: But there's also a lot of, like I said, when I was talking about our IM batch, 249-27 engineers,
[Guest]: you could see that there is a way of thinking that all of these children have, all of these
[Guest]: students have as compared to the others.
[Guest]: So even, and you could say we were all from different towns and different backgrounds
[Guest]: and economically, socially, everywhere.
[Guest]: But still, there was a way that we were all conditioned in thinking by virtue of just
[Guest]: those four years of our education.
[Guest]: So obviously, when you talk about the, your entire life and all the generations that came
[Guest]: before you, it is a, it has an undeniable effect on who you turn out to be as a person.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, one of the things that, one of the reasons I was thinking that this
[Guest]: might be the most intellectually low IQ episode of Seen and the Unseen is because I am a Bollywood
[Guest]: fan, right?
[Guest]: So I am coming with that level of intellectual analysis.
[Guest]: So for, I'm sure you've had guests who would be able to quote research papers on this from
[Guest]: international research, white papers and intelligent things like that.
[Guest]: But my, mujhe, mere dimaag mein literally when you were talking was coming coffee with
[Guest]: Karan.
[Guest]: Because I was thinking of all of these, you know, star kids and the entire nepotism debate
[Guest]: and the star kids that come on that show and Karan Johar himself.
[Guest]: You see a very, I mean, I love the show, I watch it as soon as an episode drops, but
[Guest]: it's entertaining to me because also sometimes you see how out of touch with reality people
[Guest]: can get when they are born into privilege.
[Guest]: And you know, there's also sometimes a lack of, extreme lack of self-awareness.
[Guest]: Like if you read Karan Johar's book, which again can be the lowest IQ show note ever
[Guest]: on Seen and the Unseen, but if you read his book, you'll see like there's so much contradiction
[Guest]: of himself within one paragraph, there is like self-awareness bohot kam.
[Guest]: So when you're born in that level of privilege and cushion, it obviously doesn't push you
[Guest]: to question yourself or your place in society or where you're headed beyond a point.
[Guest]: Now as a parent, actually, that's a real concern that my husband and I have about our child
[Guest]: because we feel like this child is born in full privilege, right?
[Guest]: Like we had what you could still call a middle class upbringing.
[Guest]: Now we are not middle class.
[Guest]: Now we are maybe top 1% or even 0.1% of society with IIM education and civil services and
[Guest]: all that privilege background.
[Guest]: This child, our child is born into privilege.
[Guest]: How do we give him a taste of reality and, you know, obviously you want comforts for
[Guest]: your child, but at the same time, you don't want him to be so cushioned that he grows
[Guest]: up in living in a fairy land that has no connection to reality.
[Guest]: We want him to grow up to be a contributive citizen of society.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I'm going to, as I tend to do, double click on that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But before I do, I just want to point out that, you know, you have written one of the
[Amit Varma]: great posts about imposter syndrome, on womaning in India.
[Amit Varma]: Aur abhi aap yahaan aake khud keh rahe ho ki, I am so this, I am so that and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: lowering the IQ and all that, this is absolutely, I think, ridiculous.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this is one of those episodes I'm excited for people to listen to because they'll
[Amit Varma]: discover your wonderful newsletter through it.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing regarding what you said about Mr. Johar's book, which will of course
[Amit Varma]: be in the show notes, is that, you know, having done my course, you will also recall how I
[Amit Varma]: tell all the participants that there should be no hierarchy of books in your head.
[Amit Varma]: That yeh high literature hai aur yeh toh bakwaas hai and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I really feel strongly about that.
[Amit Varma]: I think anything that you enjoy reading, you should read.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you should not be hard on yourself ki yeh toh intellectual log nahi padte hai
[Unknown]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, I'm fascinated by what you just said about like, number one, when
[Amit Varma]: you've through your newsletter, you've also like one of the things we we've discussed
[Amit Varma]: about it in the past.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I like about it is how you infused just the right amount of the personal
[Unknown]: in it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, there are your own stories, there is your own life makes it so much more relatable.
[Amit Varma]: And there is also that quality of self reflection, which I really like.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that you're bringing the self reflection to your parenting by consciously
[Amit Varma]: asking ki, as you just did, that how can we make sure that our kid, even though he's born
[Amit Varma]: to privilege, doesn't pick up, you know, the bad attitude that people born to privilege
[Amit Varma]: sometimes do have.
[Amit Varma]: So how have you thought about this in concrete terms?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how is your parenting going to be shaped by this?
[Guest]: So there is a, it's a, there's a lot of insulation that privileged kids grow up in, right?
[Guest]: Like, so we live in a gated colony.
[Guest]: And there's a slum right behind that colony, but it's hidden from view.
[Guest]: And the residents of the colony, we like to pretend that it doesn't exist.
[Guest]: There's a WhatsApp group of the colony RWA.
[Guest]: And often the topics being discussed there are ki, my cleaning lady is asking for 500
[Guest]: rupees more, how dare they, this is extortion.
[Guest]: And there's so much rage against someone who's coming from a much more underprivileged background
[Guest]: than you.
[Guest]: And for her, 500 rupees means the world, for you, it's not even a coffee.
[Guest]: So I mean, it's very disturbing to see that level of disconnection with reality and empathy.
[Guest]: So for me, it's very important that my child has that empathy and is, you know, aware of
[Guest]: what privilege is and is very, very conscious of his own.
[Guest]: I mean, already he's just three and I already have explained the word lucky to him, that
[Guest]: you know, you're lucky because, see, I showed him the other day, a lady on a wheelchair.
[Guest]: And I told him that, see that lady, she's on a chair with wheels.
[Guest]: So he said, why?
[Guest]: I said, because she can't walk.
[Guest]: See how lucky we are, because we can.
[Guest]: So you know, small things like that.
[Guest]: But I feel even at this early age, I'm talking to him about how lucky he is, because he needs
[Guest]: to be very conscious, especially as a male child that too, and born to such privilege,
[Guest]: that he needs to be conscious at every step.
[Guest]: One thing I really detest is when people give all of the credit for their achievements to
[Guest]: themselves.
[Guest]: I am here because of my own hard work.
[Guest]: I mean, for a privileged person to say that, it's very tone deaf and black self-awareness.
[Guest]: Because like, for example, even talking about myself, I am here not today on this great
[Guest]: show of yours, not because of my hard work only, but also because of all of these generations
[Guest]: that came before me, and my parents valued my education, and the kind of upbringing I
[Guest]: had, the kind of experiences I was privileged to have, right.
[Guest]: So if you lose that perspective of the debt that you owe to so many people, many of them
[Guest]: you've never even seen, many of them didn't even live in the same time as you did.
[Guest]: But you, this is all the history behind where you are today.
[Guest]: And that's important for him to realize, that's one thing.
[Guest]: And the other is also more exposure to the real world, like last week was his birthday,
[Guest]: and we celebrated in a shelter for rescue animals.
[Guest]: So he loved feeding the goat, and feeding the donkey, and feeding the duck, and obviously
[Guest]: little kids love animals, and there's a beautiful shelter called Bhan Yad in Delhi, near Saket.
[Guest]: But I chose to take him there instead of throwing him a lavish poolside party like many of his
[Guest]: peers are already getting, because I thought this keeps him more grounded and in touch
[Guest]: with reality.
[Guest]: He'll be as happy, he's a baby at least right now, he doesn't have any notions of what a
[Guest]: birthday party should look like.
[Guest]: But these are experiences that I want him to have, and obviously he's still a toddler,
[Guest]: so you still protect him from many of the harsher realities of life, but as he grows
[Guest]: up, more and more of these realities need to be introduced to him in a way that makes
[Guest]: him a more empathetic person.
[Guest]: So that's my take on parenting.
[Guest]: I also want to circle back to what you said about imposter syndrome.
[Guest]: So I want to tell you, just to increase the IQ of the show notes that I leave behind,
[Guest]: there is a test by Professor Pauline Chance, who was the person who coined the term imposter
[Guest]: syndrome.
[Guest]: Obviously a woman did it.
[Guest]: And obviously she did it because she saw other women.
[Guest]: That's how she even arrived at the realization that, is there a problem with the way we are
[Guest]: all seeing ourselves?
[Guest]: So she asked that question thankfully, and she came up with a test to diagnose imposter
[Guest]: syndrome.
[Guest]: And we can link to that test, and I would urge all your listeners, especially women,
[Guest]: to take that test.
[Guest]: It's a test on which you score from 0 to 100, and the higher your score, the higher is your
[Guest]: imposter syndrome.
[Guest]: And you'll have questions like, do you often think that you don't deserve to be where you
[Guest]: are?
[Guest]: Like, I am literally right now very, in all honesty, been thinking since you invited me
[Guest]: that I don't deserve to be on the show.
[Guest]: Why is he inviting me?
[Guest]: What will I do here?
[Guest]: What will I say that will add any value?
[Guest]: This is, I know that maybe at some intellectual level, I know that it's not true, but I'm
[Guest]: programmed to think that it is the way that it is.
[Guest]: And I was, while writing this piece on imposter syndrome that you talked about, one of the
[Guest]: women who I had interviewed for the piece, I told her, hey, do me a favor, just take
[Guest]: this test because I took the test and I knew my score.
[Guest]: And I said, tell me what is your score?
[Guest]: Because I'm covering your story.
[Guest]: I want to know how much of imposter syndrome do you actually have?
[Guest]: And she said, yeah, I have like, the test says I have like a significant amount of imposter
[Guest]: syndrome.
[Guest]: My score is 35 out of 100.
[Guest]: And my score was 88.
[Guest]: So you had much more of it.
[Guest]: My score is 88 out of 100 on imposter syndrome.
[Guest]: So that's how, that's how badly I have held myself back.
[Guest]: So I'm sorry for all of the self-deprecatory things I've said so far.
[Guest]: And I'm going to continue saying, but it's, it's conditioning.
[Guest]: It's a lot of unlearning that I consciously keep trying to do, but it still comes out
[Guest]: at times like these.
[Amit Varma]: I had a guest at home, and I forget who it is, maybe Shruti Jagirdar, because she's the
[Amit Varma]: last person I recorded with at home, or maybe before that, but it was a woman.
[Amit Varma]: And that woman before the episodes pointed out something to me, which was very true.
[Amit Varma]: She said that a lot of your great episodes are with women.
[Amit Varma]: And they always start by saying, pata nahi mujhe kyu bulaya hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so the imposter syndrome is really like a woman problem.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to now double click on the imposter syndrome.
[Amit Varma]: But before doing that, I'm very impressed by the awareness which you bring to your parenting.
[Amit Varma]: And I almost feel like I have a stake in this because I know both you and your husband very
[Amit Varma]: well.
[Amit Varma]: You've been a good friend for much longer.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the great books of social science of the last century was this book called The
[Amit Varma]: Nurture Assumption by Judith Rich Harris.
[Amit Varma]: And it was very controversial, because it showed with great data and all of that, that
[Amit Varma]: the impression that people have that kids are shaped by their parents a lot is actually
[Amit Varma]: not true, that the influence that parents have on what their kid turns out to be is
[Amit Varma]: minuscule and the far greater influences is of their peers, you know, so when you said
[Amit Varma]: that for, you know, your son's friends are already having pool parties thrown for them
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, you know, that kind of came to mind, but I hope in your case, you guys
[Amit Varma]: are influential enough to protect him from that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a contradictory thought here.
[Amit Varma]: And they're both true in their different domains.
[Amit Varma]: And one is a role of luck.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the things my time as a professional poker player taught me is that we underestimate
[Amit Varma]: the role of luck in our lives, like poker is, of course, a game of skill, but the quantum
[Amit Varma]: of luck is very high.
[Amit Varma]: So you need a huge sample size of events for your skill to express itself.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, in life, and I've written about this quite often, we underestimate the role
[Amit Varma]: of luck to the extent that exactly what you said happens that good things happen to people,
[Amit Varma]: they give credit for it to themselves, and they allow themselves to get arrogant, and
[Amit Varma]: bad things happen to people.
[Amit Varma]: And they allow it to affect their self esteem, and they get themselves down and they suffer
[Amit Varma]: from imposter syndrome, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And we should sort of watch out for that and sort of try to be equanimous.
[Amit Varma]: I think this understanding of luck and probability almost takes you into a Buddhist direction
[Amit Varma]: where you're kind of, you know, you leave your emotions out of it and you're equanimous,
[Amit Varma]: which is, I guess, a sort of a good way to be and, and I would imagine that these different
[Amit Varma]: directions you go in when you ignore luck, there's a role of gender to it also, it's
[Amit Varma]: a men who are more likely to look at the good that happens to them and get arrogant and
[Amit Varma]: so women who are more likely to have that confidence gap, you know, there was this great
[Amit Varma]: article in the Atlantic called the confidence gap, which also are linked to which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: reference to a number of these studies showing that, you know, women will not apply for jobs
[Amit Varma]: that they absolutely deserve, you know, you in your piece on imposter syndrome, you quoted
[Amit Varma]: this lady called Archana.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just quote that bit.
[Amit Varma]: And these are her words, because I think they're very sort of, they're applied to a lot of
[Amit Varma]: people where, you know, a global role was advertised in her company.
[Amit Varma]: And she said, quote, even though the whole world was telling me to apply for it, I wasn't
[Amit Varma]: sure I was ready.
[Amit Varma]: It was my classic, I'm getting it because I'm a woman logic.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't want people to question why was I given this role.
[Amit Varma]: So I ended up not applying for it at all.
[Amit Varma]: When the position was finally filled, I was shocked to discover that a man who had far
[Amit Varma]: less relevant experience in me had been selected for it.
[Amit Varma]: The HR leader later told me in confidence that out of the pool of candidates ever considering
[Amit Varma]: for the position, I was the only one who everybody unanimously thought could do the job.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got sort of other examples of this as well, including people like Maya Angelou
[Amit Varma]: once saying, quote, I have written 11 books, but each time I think, oh, they're going to
[Amit Varma]: find out now.
[Amit Varma]: I've run a game on everybody and they're going to find me out, stop quote, and Einstein says
[Amit Varma]: a similar thing.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also known in psychology as a Dunning-Kruger effect, right?
[Amit Varma]: That I mean, there are two sides to the Dunning-Kruger effect.
[Amit Varma]: One side is, you know, people tend to think they are better at something than they actually
[Amit Varma]: are.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, Lake Wobegon is a famous example of that.
[Amit Varma]: Lake Wobegon is a fictional town created by the novelist Garrison Keillor, where everybody
[Amit Varma]: thinks they're better than average, which can obviously not be the case, right?
[Guest]: It's an island of men.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, it's a very man thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: And so there's a term for it called the Lake Wobegon effect, where everybody thinks they're
[Amit Varma]: better than average.
[Amit Varma]: So every driver will tell you he's a better driver than average, though obviously it's
[Amit Varma]: not true.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, I'm using the male pronoun deliberately, you know, but the converse of
[Amit Varma]: that is that people who are experts will often downplay their expertise because it is so
[Amit Varma]: easy to them that they will think what is a big deal, anyone can do it, which in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I think you're also doing because what you've done with this newsletter, writing 70 something
[Amit Varma]: posts week after week, week after week.
[Amit Varma]: It's a stunning act of discipline.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it's it's so consistent and it's so consistently good and you're completely
[Amit Varma]: underplaying that like it's easy, which anyone can tell you it's not.
[Guest]: So, you know, you said your score was 85, 88, 88, which means very high imposter syndrome,
[Guest]: almost reached my 95 target.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you fight this in yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Because if you're saying it was 88, it was 88 after you knew that there is such a thing.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: You knew there was a trap, but you still fell into it.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So I was literally writing a piece on it.
[Guest]: I was researching it for my piece.
[Guest]: I was interviewing women and beating them, why did you belittle your own accomplishments,
[Guest]: your achievements, your capacity so much?
[Guest]: Why do you think so little of yourself?
[Guest]: And then I took the test myself in all consciousness that this test is designed to highlight this.
[Guest]: But then I tried to be as honest as I could and I thought back to actual decisions I've
[Guest]: taken in my life and how I thought about myself, my abilities, potentials, when I took those
[Guest]: decisions, how I felt when I was given an honor, how I felt when I met with failure.
[Guest]: And I wrote it in all honesty and I thought, yes, I will get a good high score, but this
[Guest]: was like beyond my wildest imagination that it's really bad.
[Amit Varma]: Has it changed you?
[Amit Varma]: In the sense that do you now tell yourself to watch out for it?
[Amit Varma]: Do you stop holding yourself back from doing whatever you want to do?
[Guest]: I do.
[Guest]: Two things have changed.
[Guest]: One, which is something I've written in the piece, is about compliments.
[Guest]: When people tell me that you've been showering me with these kind compliments about the work
[Guest]: I've done.
[Guest]: Like my earlier pre-writing womaning, my instinct was to deny and argue back and no, no, Amit,
[Guest]: this is not true.
[Guest]: Anyone can write it and see so many people write newsletters and sub-stack numbers, dekho
[Guest]: kitte writers hai ye wo.
[Guest]: I would have argued back.
[Guest]: Now I hold that argument, it's still in my mind, but I force myself to say thank you.
[Guest]: That's for me big.
[Guest]: I know it sounds very normal and what's the big deal in it, but I suppose women and even
[Guest]: men who suffer from severe crippling imposter syndrome will realize that that's a big step
[Guest]: to just graciously accept a compliment.
[Guest]: That's one change that I have forced myself, I've consciously made and succeeded in making
[Guest]: happen.
[Guest]: And the second was about how after you said, are you able to go for things?
[Guest]: That has happened a lot more after motherhood because I feel like motherhood kind of is
[Guest]: a transformative experience, that's an understatement for sure.
[Guest]: But also for me at least, it gave me the perspective of how little things matter that we think
[Guest]: so much about.
[Guest]: And when you become responsible for another human life is when you feel that everything
[Guest]: else I worry about was so inconsequential.
[Guest]: After becoming a mother, when people would talk to me about mera boss, mera deadline,
[Guest]: mera office, I'd be like, yeh kya begar cheezon pe log tension le rahe hain.
[Guest]: My own things that would hold me back, which would seem like big things in the past, now
[Guest]: I've become a lot more pragmatic about it and you know, universe is very large, life
[Guest]: is very long, we are a speck in the universe, it doesn't really matter whether I come on
[Guest]: a podcast or what be in the larger scheme of things.
[Guest]: So let me accept if a friend is inviting me and I know I might feel this primal urge that
[Guest]: I don't deserve to be here, but forget it, it's okay.
[Guest]: Plenty of undeserving people get what they don't deserve.
[Guest]: Maybe I do deserve it, maybe I don't, either way it doesn't matter in the larger scheme
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: So that kind of attitude of doesn't really matter in the larger scheme of things and
[Guest]: what really matters is I am responsible for a life, for an individual and that is going
[Guest]: to be probably my biggest contribution.
[Guest]: That kind of also gives you a lot more grounding and you tend to be more, for me at least it
[Guest]: has made me more adventurous in the decisions I take.
[Amit Varma]: In your experience, how important are circles of female solidarity and female friendship
[Amit Varma]: in all this?
[Amit Varma]: Because my assumption is that if people are chronically underconfident, then it really
[Amit Varma]: helps if somebody tells you, no, you're so good, you are the expert in this, you deserve
[Amit Varma]: this, you go for it.
[Amit Varma]: And men don't tell women that, right?
[Unknown]: Men take women in their lives for granted.
[Amit Varma]: Even for all the care work that women do, for example, men won't express it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the food is great, or, you know, thank you for this or whatever, they kind of take it
[Amit Varma]: for granted.
[Amit Varma]: So it therefore at one level, and this is something, you know, I didn't recorded an
[Amit Varma]: episode yesterday with Alice Evans, and she was also speaking about this through countries
[Amit Varma]: that these networks and become really important networks of female solidarity and friendship.
[Amit Varma]: And one way in which it strikes me that it certainly would, it's just in terms of giving
[Amit Varma]: each other courage, and helping you beat this confidence gap.
[Guest]: Yeah, so that has been a learning over decades for me, because, like I said, I was a full
[Guest]: on misogynist when I was young, as I'm in love school, I was like a proper tomboy, I've
[Guest]: written about this also.
[Guest]: So that that was my ethos also, and it was like a very common undercurrent of the average
[Guest]: young psyche in that in the 90s, that, you know, girls are stupid, they talk about fashion
[Guest]: and they are always gossiping and I'm above all that.
[Guest]: And so I was I genuinely had more male friends in school, because I used to look down upon
[Guest]: women and friendships with women, and I used to think that women are a lot, there's a lot
[Guest]: of politics, there's backstabbing, there's all this stuff happening, which is too much
[Guest]: to take.
[Guest]: Men are simpler, and boys have nothing going on in their brains beyond what they are doing
[Guest]: at that moment, easier to deal with them.
[Guest]: And I used to genuinely feel that male friendships are better and stronger, because I would see
[Guest]: them lasting over years, right, like our fathers would still be friends with their childhood
[Guest]: male friends, but our mothers, you would never hear of ke meri school mein wo friend thi,
[Guest]: meri college mein wo friend thi.
[Guest]: Now later in life, I realized that that was also a privilege that men had, right, to stay
[Guest]: in touch with their peers and their friends.
[Guest]: And women were often married off into separate families, surname change, often name also
[Guest]: change in the absence of a social network, how will they even stay in touch?
[Guest]: And they are so busy with everyday life, like I've told you my mom's daily routine, where
[Guest]: is the space in that for friendships?
[Guest]: So all of those were things that I didn't see at that time, and I had these notions
[Guest]: about male friendships versus female friendships.
[Guest]: But over the years, I have realized that it's actually the other way around.
[Guest]: Female friendships, when with the right people who are, you know, who have that realization
[Guest]: of how the world is designed to hold us back, and we are on our own, we have to build each
[Guest]: other up.
[Guest]: And when you have that kind of a positive female friendship, it can be the best thing
[Guest]: that you do in your life, just talking to that friend.
[Guest]: And like I told you, I used to beat up other women, ke tum kyu apne baar mein itna chota
[Guest]: soch ro?
[Guest]: And I would not say that to myself ever, because I am thinking, myself thinking less of myself.
[Guest]: So then my friend will come and beat me on that, ke yaar tum kyu apne baar mein aisa
[Guest]: soch ro?
[Guest]: So I mean, the standard trope is talk to yourself the way you would talk to your best friend.
[Guest]: But we are not able to do that because we are, as you quoted from the post, we are conditioned
[Guest]: not to do that.
[Guest]: So that's why I think in that context, female friendships, especially with women who have
[Guest]: that perspective of building each other up, that sort of a female friendship can just
[Guest]: be a huge, huge boost and support in your life.
[Guest]: And you also have these shared experiences.
[Guest]: So that was the whole reason I started writing Womaning when I realized that many things
[Guest]: I was experiencing were not unique to me.
[Guest]: Because up until then, I thought ye mere saath hi ho raha hai, jo ho raha hai.
[Guest]: And because I have this great, unique trajectory in life that all of the things that I've done,
[Guest]: which half of them we covered and my career to bhi start bhi nahi hua hai, all of that,
[Guest]: which I've done, that is the reason why I am having these experiences at work, with
[Guest]: the family and everything.
[Guest]: But then when you start talking to other women, you realize that a lot of these are shared
[Guest]: experiences and a lot of them are not because I am who I am, but because I'm a woman.
[Guest]: And when you see that undercurrent and that thread, that's the whole reason I started
[Guest]: writing Womaning.
[Guest]: Because I was like, this thread needs to be made more obvious to men and women both.
[Guest]: Because women need to realize that my challenges are not unique to me.
[Guest]: And they are not something that's happening to me because of something I did.
[Guest]: I don't deserve this.
[Guest]: This is a gender wide thing.
[Guest]: And men need to realize, be more conscious of them for obvious reasons too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And one point you kind of made here is worth underscoring, which is about, you know, men
[Amit Varma]: staying in touch, women not staying in touch, but that's because women get so fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: uprooted in our country so often during marriage.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the finest books I've read in the last decade is called India Moving by
[Unknown]: Chinmay Tumbe.
[Amit Varma]: And it's about the history of internal migration in India.
[Amit Varma]: And the big TIL there is that most internal migration happens in India because a woman
[Amit Varma]: gets married, and she's leaving a home and she's going somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: And it is a complete uprooting.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes, of course, it's a different city, different state, but even if it is not, it's
[Amit Varma]: a different milieu, it's a different house, it's different expectations.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like you've gone from, you know, one oppressive environment to another, no
[Guest]: matter how much you change your name changes, so you're just a whole different person.
[Guest]: The person who existed one week back before your marriage doesn't exist anymore, your
[Guest]: entire existence is wiped off.
[Guest]: So I mean, how do you expect your friendships telling you could be an identity?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, let's go back to your childhood and we'll do your full biography.
[Guest]: Don't worry, I thought I was actually talking too much, I don't want to break records.
[Amit Varma]: No one can talk too much for the same reason that no one is boring.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all lives are so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier, you know, while talking about your childhood, you mentioned and just now again,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that you weren't aware of these undercurrents of misogyny for a long time,
[Amit Varma]: that your mother would do all of this.
[Amit Varma]: And you would say, she's got to wake me up five times, you know, even though she's got
[Amit Varma]: so much going on.
[Amit Varma]: And equally in college, you said that, again, you weren't aware of this, tell me about that
[Amit Varma]: process of awareness, like, how did you start becoming aware?
[Amit Varma]: One, how did you start becoming aware?
[Amit Varma]: And two, how did you then start putting a frame to it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, this is the way the world is and, you know, figuring out how to think about
[Amit Varma]: it in terms of, you know, whether it's a certain kind of feminist thinker or writer who began
[Amit Varma]: to influence you first, how did that evolution sort of happen in your own life?
[Guest]: This is a black box for me to I've thought about this a lot often, when was that time?
[Guest]: Is there any one moment in which I suddenly had a coin dropping moment, oh, this is how
[Guest]: the world is.
[Guest]: And now I see everything from that lens, like, people close to me accuse me, you're like,
[Guest]: you know, with a person with a hammer to whom everything is a nail now, that's how you are
[Guest]: with gender.
[Guest]: And that's I am guilty of that to some extent, but it is so overarching and every and just
[Guest]: omnipresent this this lens, but I don't know a particular moment, I, I think the explanation
[Guest]: I have come to is that it was I was just a part of a larger cultural shift that happened
[Guest]: at some point in the 2000s and early 2010s, which is that we started recognizing some
[Guest]: of these things that we had taken, accepted at face value, to be not the way the world
[Guest]: necessarily should be.
[Guest]: And there's something wrong here.
[Guest]: So I think Mrinalji spoke about this on during her, her interview with you.
[Guest]: And she said that, aisa lagta tha ke kuch galat ho raha hai, par pata nahi tha kya hai.
[Guest]: So I had that feeling my entire childhood, ke even though, like I said, I was a misogynist
[Guest]: myself, and I was guilty of all of these tropes, believing them, following them, propagating
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: But I also had this nagging feeling, especially because I grew up with a brother, right.
[Guest]: So I would see very stark differences in the way everybody and the world treated him, not
[Guest]: just my family, but the institutions around us, the society, public spaces, friends, everything.
[Guest]: And this difference became much more stark as we grew older, because as kids, you're
[Guest]: still, I mean, at least, credit to my parents, they never did any discrimination, ke ladki
[Guest]: hai toh isko do roti kam di jayenge, that didn't happen in my house at all.
[Guest]: It was the other way around, badla, I think I was quite pampered by my dad.
[Guest]: But there was a difference, ke haan, tum iti zor se mat haso, aise ladkiya nahi hasti hain.
[Guest]: Aur you know, I remember one memory of hum gayi, bus mein kahin ja rahe the and I stood
[Guest]: up and immediately I was told ke baith jao, peeche wale sab dekhenge, ladkiya aise khadi
[Guest]: nahi hoti hain.
[Guest]: And it was, for me, it was such a weird thing, ke ladkiya ka kya hai isme khade hone, I just
[Guest]: want to stretch, I'm standing, but then suddenly it is, there is a new lens that you're introduced
[Guest]: to, that this is the way the world is going to see you, and so you better not cross the
[Guest]: line there.
[Guest]: So those faint lines started becoming more clear as I grew older.
[Guest]: When we went to college, suddenly, like I said, I always had more male friends than
[Guest]: female friends all through school.
[Guest]: But suddenly there was a different lens with which my male friendships were seen when I,
[Guest]: once I entered college, because there were a lot of romantic relationships happening
[Guest]: in batch mates and all.
[Guest]: So my mom always used to call me, koi hai kya, kaun hai, kya hai.
[Guest]: And if I mention a boy's name in passing, then suddenly she wants to double click on
[Guest]: that, as you say, let's double click, ladke ka naam.
[Guest]: So I mean, those things never happened with my brother.
[Guest]: So going out with friends, something simple for him, very, a thing that he didn't have
[Guest]: to think about twice, I had to.
[Guest]: I had to think about the way I would formulate that application to my parents, is tarah se
[Guest]: bolenge saath mein yeh jaa rahi hai, woh jaa rahi hai, toh itne baje wapas aayenge, yeh
[Guest]: mode of transport hai.
[Guest]: So and even beyond that, like sometimes I wouldn't even bother because I would in my
[Guest]: mind be like, yeh toh is not outside the realm of possibility for me.
[Guest]: Ek Kurukshetra se Shimla ki trip ban rahi hai, friends ki, bhool jao.
[Guest]: I'm sorry, I'm out even before I ask anybody else.
[Guest]: I know this is not within my realm of possibilities.
[Guest]: So there were things like this, which, especially between me and my brother, because that was
[Guest]: one male figure that I had seen my whole life and us being treated the same our whole life.
[Guest]: And then suddenly now us being treated differently.
[Guest]: So I think that niggling thing behind my mind of kuch galat hai, started becoming more and
[Guest]: more concrete with age, kuch zyada hi galat hai.
[Guest]: And then over time, I think culturally also, like I said, our society, the F word feminism
[Guest]: was introduced, movies mein thoda dikhne laga, ke haan, woh ladkiyan jo, peeche showpiece
[Guest]: hoti thi aur ek woh bachao bachao bachao victim hogi hai, heroa kaise bacha lega, that's,
[Guest]: aur ek gaane mein dance kar degi.
[Guest]: So that's the extent of female representation we saw in pop culture, that began to be questioned
[Guest]: and there were movies that shifted the narrative.
[Guest]: So slowly, I think culturally also, the environment was conducive.
[Guest]: And that's how it was a very, very gradual process.
[Guest]: So I cannot think of any one trigger that led to it.
[Amit Varma]: And what was your conception of yourself through this period, in the sense ki pehle toh apne
[Amit Varma]: engineering kar liya, after topping class, uske baad MBA kar liya, but, you know, are
[Amit Varma]: you kind of going with the flow and because you're always excelling in academics, you're
[Amit Varma]: just taking the most obvious next step that everybody takes, kyunki 12th ke baad toh engineering
[Amit Varma]: hi main option hoti hai, uske baad MBA is such a great option, you got into IIM Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, was, were you sort of going with that flow?
[Amit Varma]: Or was there a plan that, or did you think about it and think about, you know, these
[Amit Varma]: are the things I'm interested in, these are the things I want to do, this is the kind
[Amit Varma]: of life I want to live.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about that sort of evolution in your thinking and your understanding of yourself.
[Guest]: Yeah, so, at least in the early stages, there was zero thought.
[Guest]: The only thought I have, which I've mentioned before, is the ethic of my parents have worked
[Guest]: very hard to give me an education.
[Guest]: And so I have one job in life, everything else is provided for me, I have one job, which
[Guest]: is to study.
[Guest]: So I'm going to do it well, because this is the least I can do to justify my parents efforts
[Guest]: and sacrifices.
[Guest]: So that kind of sailed me through school.
[Guest]: And like you said, uske baad, doctor engineer do options hoti hain, bio mujhe pasand nahi
[Guest]: aati si toh, ho gaya, physics, chemistry, maths, chalo, engineer.
[Guest]: Uske baad bhi, it was, again, MBA was a very obvious and aspirational route for everyone.
[Guest]: I did get a job, but I also got MBA.
[Guest]: So nahi hota toh job kar lete, ho gaya toh kar liya.
[Guest]: Again it was a very, going with the flow decision, which is just popular wisdom, parents' wisdom,
[Guest]: sab log yeh kar rahe hain, achi cheez hai, karo.
[Guest]: Even the choice of my branch, electronics and communication, I had no particular love
[Guest]: for that direction, nor do I even today, but sadly.
[Guest]: But that was just a very natural decision, ke best hoti hain, electronics aur computer
[Guest]: science do best hain, unmein se ek le lo.
[Guest]: Toh jo mil jayega, achche college mein le liya.
[Guest]: It was not a very conscious decision on my part.
[Guest]: I think the step where I started thoda sa taking conscious decisions was around the
[Guest]: end of MBA, when the kind of job I went for.
[Guest]: But until that point, it was following the flow, and that said, to this day, I tell people,
[Guest]: because when you look back at my CV, it looks very, waah kya, bahot decisive steps have
[Guest]: been taken at various junctures.
[Guest]: But when people ask me for guidance, I'm like, dekho, for me, I don't, even today, I don't
[Guest]: have a plan for this is what I want to do with my life.
[Guest]: But for me, what has always worked is that the next step has been somehow clear to me.
[Guest]: That either it has been, this is what I don't want to do.
[Guest]: So yeh mujhe nahi karna hai, toh therefore the other alternative is jo mujhe karna hai.
[Guest]: Or it is that this is one thing that I really want.
[Guest]: Like womaning was something that was not a push from anywhere, it was a pull from inside
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: It was literally something that was bursting to come out.
[Guest]: So that was a decision made that way.
[Guest]: But it was only the first step that was clear to me.
[Guest]: Even that, until your course, as we'll discuss later, when you shifted it in my mind from
[Guest]: a book to a newsletter, until that time, even that wasn't clear.
[Guest]: So always it's been the first step, or rather the next step that has been clear to me.
[Guest]: Beyond that, I can't see the road where it is going.
[Guest]: But that much clarity and just the courage to take that step, which often, that itself
[Guest]: is something denied to women and to a person who comes from a certain comfort, ab toh I
[Guest]: am bagaira sab ho gaya, ab kaun chhod ke jate hain itni high paying job into government.
[Guest]: So things like that, there are obstacles even in that taking one step.
[Guest]: So those, those I have managed to overcome and those have been decisive steps.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, during the writing course, I like quoting the novelist Riyal Doctoro, who when speaking
[Amit Varma]: of writing a book says, it's okay to drive by the headlights.
[Guest]: You know, you can make the whole journey that way.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's sort of my philosophy to life as well, or at least my express philosophy,
[Amit Varma]: because I don't actually live it myself.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't really lead by example.
[Amit Varma]: But the philosophy being have a bias for action, you know, don't try to plan everything out
[Amit Varma]: in your head ki pehle yeh hoga, phir wo hoga, phir wo hoga.
[Amit Varma]: Just have a bias for action, just go out there, do something, you know, just just keep at
[Amit Varma]: it, just keep doing stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's what you've sort of done so well.
[Amit Varma]: So when you sent me a note about the kind of things you could talk about, I noticed
[Amit Varma]: these two were really interesting bullet points, which are life lessons from engineering in
[Amit Varma]: the Haryana hinterlands, and life lessons from IIM Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: So we've kind of spoken about both of these places in general.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm intrigued by the term you use life lessons, like, how would you kind of sum it
[Amit Varma]: up in terms of what were your life lessons from these two places, and perhaps your lessons
[Amit Varma]: about yourself?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I think both of these places shaped me, I mean, rather than taking away a lesson
[Guest]: outside of me, it was things that change inside me.
[Guest]: So like I said, academically coming from a very strong background, I was very confident
[Guest]: about those aspects.
[Guest]: But I think my personality as a whole had not developed and to some extent, it is also
[Guest]: because 9 to 12 tak cable TV bandh aur khelna bandh aur padh ke padhai karo, right.
[Guest]: So that makes your personality a bit unidimensional, of course.
[Guest]: So that I think I really came into my own and I blossomed in Kurukshetra, despite all
[Guest]: the forces that impeded a woman from doing that on that campus.
[Guest]: But I did, I kind of developed a lot more confidence in my abilities and organizational
[Guest]: abilities, managerial abilities, the leadership abilities, things that I could pull together,
[Guest]: juniors of college, inspire them and motivate them to achieve a goal, organize a festival
[Guest]: or whatever it was, publish a magazine.
[Guest]: So I think for me, Kurukshetra, the biggest thing I learned from engineering was not engineering,
[Guest]: but it was this stuff.
[Guest]: So for me, it was a personality development course, plus plus.
[Guest]: That was my engineering.
[Guest]: So that was the, not a lesson, but the way it changed me.
[Guest]: And then I think in IIM, there was a lot of humility that came with it, because like I
[Guest]: said, patthar feko, topar palal ko lagayega.
[Guest]: So that is the environment you are in.
[Guest]: And I remember in Ahmedabad, we used to actually live behind IIM Ahmedabad campus.
[Guest]: And we were like young students aur aise afwaa hoti thi ki pata hai IIM ke bachche raat ko
[Guest]: do ghanta sote hain, pata hai wo kitna padhai karte hain.
[Guest]: And then suddenly, I am on that side and I am like, mereko toh needh aati hai, main kaise
[Guest]: karoon.
[Guest]: So, and then you genuinely see these people who are way above average, like they are another
[Guest]: breed.
[Guest]: The amount of discipline they have, the kind of academic drive in them.
[Guest]: And then you realize that, oh, I have always thought of myself as an academically accomplished
[Guest]: person, but I actually don't share this drive.
[Guest]: So there were things that to be inspired from, there were also a lot of lessons of what not
[Guest]: to do with life.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of, and I'm sure my IIM peers who might be listening will agree with some
[Guest]: parts of this.
[Guest]: There's a lot of cutthroat competition, materialism, a lot of, life is a zero-sum game.
[Guest]: That's a huge thing that's kind of drilled into you by the IIM culture, that there is
[Guest]: a campus mein bolte the something called RG Giri.
[Guest]: So there's a, RG is relative grading.
[Guest]: So that's a system where you and I write one exam, you score higher than me, that effectively
[Guest]: lowers my score.
[Guest]: So it's not just that you got 10 on 10 and I got 9 on 10.
[Guest]: It's also that my 9 becomes 8.5 because you got 10.
[Guest]: It's like that.
[Guest]: So, I mean, suppose you, so the higher you score as my peer, the worse it is for me.
[Amit Varma]: That feels like such a toxic system because when you're not trying to become good, you're
[Amit Varma]: trying to be better than others, which is just sounds so ugly to me.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And it also, it also initiates this crab mentality, right?
[Guest]: Like your welfare is worse for me.
[Guest]: So our incentives are aligned so that I want you to do worse in life.
[Guest]: I want to pull you down.
[Guest]: If I see you succeeding, I want to put hurdles in your path.
[Guest]: So it also kind of conditions you in a very toxic kind of mindset.
[Guest]: I was luckily never able to learn any of those tricks, but I did see a lot of that.
[Guest]: Like it was, it was sometimes tragic to the extent that people had imbibed these values
[Guest]: and were able to live them like, um, I don't know if this will be worth airing, but there
[Guest]: was a story that comes to mind, which is there was this group of topper guys, okay?
[Guest]: There would be class projects and as they used to say, project group of five, there
[Guest]: would be these guys who will make eye contact across the classroom and they would form a
[Guest]: group in half a second.
[Guest]: That we are toppers, we are going to stick together because our group will do the best
[Guest]: and then therefore our Jigiri, the others will do worse off and we'll be the best.
[Guest]: Fine to make groups with your friends, but there was a lens to it.
[Guest]: It was not a lens of compatibility or friendship.
[Guest]: It was a lens of success.
[Guest]: Who is going to help me succeed the most?
[Guest]: And then there were these students who would inevitably always be left behind at the end
[Guest]: and who would not be accepted in any of the groups and it was often very heartbreaking.
[Guest]: They would send emails later on the class group, ke koi group mein jaga hai, kya I am
[Guest]: still looking and it was always the same kids, same students.
[Guest]: I remember there was one classmate, batchmate, he was differently abled and he was always
[Guest]: one of the last to be picked.
[Guest]: And then I remember one course we had was business law and in which it was all about
[Guest]: legal stuff and I used to doze off the second that professor would start talking, but usme
[Guest]: yeh hi hua.
[Guest]: Group bana, the professor said, groups of X and immediately this, I was sitting right
[Guest]: behind one of the topper kids, jinka eye contact mein group ban jata tha.
[Guest]: And that guy turns to his fellow topper guy and he says ki is group mein usko lete hain.
[Guest]: The student who was always left behind because woh barrister tha pehle, toh isme hume uske
[Guest]: hone se advantage hoga.
[Guest]: And I just felt so evil at that time, I was like ki yaar, this is one guy you systemically
[Guest]: always leave behind.
[Guest]: Even I am guilty of it to some extent because I am making friends with my, groups with my
[Guest]: friends and this guy is being left behind by all of us as a group every time, year after
[Guest]: year, subject after subject, class after class.
[Guest]: And this one time because he is useful to you, you immediately want to go get him first
[Guest]: because you know that you all are IITians and you don't have that legal background.
[Guest]: So for me it was very, these were lessons of what not to do with life also.
[Guest]: I mean and I remember a few years later I met a batchmate who was a good friend on campus
[Guest]: and many of my batchmates have gone on to do extremely well for themselves and a lot
[Guest]: of well-deserved success, many are entrepreneurs of unicorn startups today and people have
[Guest]: bungalows with indoor heated pools I am told, to which I am never invited.
[Guest]: But people have done really well for themselves.
[Guest]: I have consulted a therapist myself and one of the things my therapist has also told me
[Guest]: is that because I live in Gurgaon, she said that lot of people who consult me in Gurgaon
[Guest]: are from these very high net worth backgrounds and many of them are deeply depressed today
[Guest]: because they find no purpose in what they are doing because they've spent so many years
[Guest]: of their life chasing material wealth and money.
[Guest]: So nothing against people who do want money, I think it's a very, you can do a lot of good
[Guest]: for the world when you have a lot of money.
[Guest]: But also one of the things that I am taught me about what not to do is that chase.
[Guest]: I saw it very early and I figured out very early that that's not the path for me.
[Guest]: So that way it kind of strongly molded the person I am.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the zero-sum mentality is weird to me because the real world is a positive something,
[Unknown]: right?
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So you would imagine that if MBA is teaching, then they will teach that mentality, incentives
[Amit Varma]: will be different.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: But if this sounds like incredibly toxic to me and on the point of money and happiness
[Amit Varma]: and again, if I misremember, please forgive me, but I think Arthur Brooks had once written
[Amit Varma]: an essay on this where he pointed out that when people surveyed the happiness of the
[Amit Varma]: USA, he was talking about the, he was talking about America when people surveyed the happiness
[Amit Varma]: of the USA.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it was of men in USA if I remember correctly, but it certainly applies in my
[Amit Varma]: mind best there.
[Amit Varma]: What they found was that you have this curve where you go gradually downwards in terms
[Amit Varma]: of happiness until your mid 40s or late 40s.
[Amit Varma]: And then you suddenly start becoming much happier.
[Amit Varma]: And his explanation for this is that that is around the time you realize that all your
[Amit Varma]: life you felt you behaved as if your happiness is contingent on money.
[Amit Varma]: And by that time, mid 40s, late 40s, you've made all the money in the world, and you haven't
[Amit Varma]: been happy.
[Amit Varma]: And then you realize this is not where happiness lies.
[Amit Varma]: And it lies wherever then is for people to define it for themselves where happiness lies,
[Amit Varma]: but at least they know what not to do, as you said, and then they turn elsewhere and
[Amit Varma]: then true happiness kind of comes and I'm of course in my late 40s, but I've never really
[Amit Varma]: made much money here.
[Amit Varma]: Heated indoor swimming pool, mere paas hota toh main gareepon pe baad deta, main kya karunga
[Amit Varma]: heated indoor swimming pool, but, but yeah, I mean, so that's, that's, again, the fact
[Amit Varma]: that there's no correlation between money and happiness, toh pata hi hai, but it's kind
[Amit Varma]: of sad if these sort of mindsets are being propagated.
[Amit Varma]: So after you finished your MBA, you know, you eventually landed up in the civil services,
[Amit Varma]: but take me through that journey of your deciding ki kya karna hai aur waha pe kyu gaye, like,
[Amit Varma]: did you decide while doing your MBA that, you know, you want to go for the civil services
[Amit Varma]: or was the civil services always an attractive option, you know, like when I was growing
[Amit Varma]: up, it was always, you know, doctor medical toh hai hi, but IAS ka exam though, that is
[Amit Varma]: a, you know, the biggest prestige and obviously I grew up in the 70s and 80s where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the state was all powerful.
[Amit Varma]: So even more so there, private sector toh zyada tha hi nahi and me being a rebel and
[Amit Varma]: my father already being in the IAS, I was like mujhe nahi karna, main toh writer banunga,
[Amit Varma]: main attic mein staff karunga and then I will make a lot of money and have an indoor swimming
[Amit Varma]: pool with my books too, well, none of that happened.
[Amit Varma]: But so what was your sort of journey like in that regard?
[Guest]: Yeah, so UPSC karna hai was never a target in life ke yeh toh karna hi hai or even that
[Guest]: early prestige that you spoke about had kind of, I think, dwindled a bit by the 2000s,
[Guest]: late 2000s is when I finished my MBA.
[Guest]: And at that time, the done thing was Goldman Sachs, McKinsey, BCG, in mein jao, day zero
[Guest]: placement that was a thing in IMK, there was a placement season and day zero is when the
[Guest]: best firms with the best money and the international postings will come.
[Guest]: Then day ones mein thoda sa desi firms will come, then day two, three pe aayo toh you
[Guest]: are the leftovers.
[Guest]: That was the, it was a very strong hierarchy like that and there was a summer placement
[Guest]: at the end of one year, first semester actually, at the end of the first trimester itself,
[Guest]: there was a summer placement for the end of one year wala summer break mein jaa ke aap
[Guest]: do maheena internship karte ho, toh wo internship mein where you got placed kind of seals your
[Guest]: fate in terms of where your life will head is, at least that was a popular notion and
[Guest]: also that also seals how your peers see you.
[Guest]: So your peers are also all trained to see you as yeh day zero person hai, yeh day one
[Guest]: person hai, yeh day two person hai and that's the caste system in which we will also make
[Guest]: our friendships now.
[Guest]: Like I said, you know, wo jo eye contact groups ban raha hai, wo day zero ke ladko ke beech
[Amit Varma]: mein ban raha hai.
[Guest]: Aap kaunsi thi?
[Guest]: This was interesting because of my 9.9 CGPA na, I got an interview call from pretty much
[Guest]: every company that was coming on day zero.
[Guest]: So I must have given 20 interviews in one day.
[Guest]: It is a crazy process, like there are these people with headsets walking all around ke
[Guest]: Mahima Avashisht is out of the McKinsey interview, now she's next heading towards first floor
[Guest]: Goldman Sachs ke room mein and like you're being shunted from room to room and for me
[Guest]: it was all very blinding and I was very thrown by it.
[Guest]: I was very, I mean, I was totally out of place.
[Guest]: I was one of those people who were seen as the biggest promising candidates at the beginning
[Guest]: of that day and by the end of that day I had failed all the interviews, like 20 interviews
[Guest]: in a row I had failed.
[Guest]: I mean, you can imagine self-esteem kahan neeche, patal log mein jaa ke girti ansaan
[Guest]: ki, like at the beginning people are seeing you as the rising star of tomorrow and at
[Guest]: the end they're like iski taraf dekho mat zyada.
[Amit Varma]: They didn't deserve you.
[Guest]: No, so by that time I was like, I mean, don't even look at her, she's a panauti, iski taraf
[Guest]: dekho ke tumhare marks kam ho jaye, tumhare chances kam ho jaye.
[Guest]: So I got placed on what was called day 0.5, they came up with a new thing, which was like
[Guest]: the second day ki subah-subah there were some leftover Indian firms but were offering international
[Guest]: postings.
[Guest]: So I got into ICICI in London.
[Guest]: So ICICI was a very tame compared to all the formidable brands that came the day before
[Guest]: but it was a posting in London, so it was, so I often would say that I am the poorest
[Guest]: intern living in London because I literally had to mouth existence given the daily allowance
[Guest]: I was getting from them.
[Guest]: But my peers who were all other in the fancy firms of London were all living it up while
[Guest]: I was like yeh sandwich khaya jaye ke na khaya jaye, 2 pound ka hai, always converting to
[Guest]: rupees in my head.
[Guest]: But yeah, so it was like a semi-respectable internship that I got.
[Guest]: And again, at that time it was heartbreaking and shattered your self-esteem, like I said,
[Guest]: it was very, very depressing, that experience.
[Guest]: But again, in hindsight, I think, like you said, you know, your life would be so different
[Guest]: if you're born in privilege.
[Guest]: I think my life would also have been very different if on that day I had cracked an
[Guest]: interview.
[Guest]: So that extreme string of many, many failures was actually, I think, good in the long run
[Guest]: because it gave me some distance from the whole craziness that was going on in that
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: And then that also kind of shaped the friends I made later.
[Guest]: And hum sab day one wale chote log apne-apne friendships banate the.
[Guest]: So we would, and that kind of gave me a lot more reality check of this is what real people
[Guest]: are like.
[Guest]: I know a lot of people also on this campus, not everyone is success crazy.
[Guest]: And so, so that was good.
[Guest]: So we were talking about UPSC, I'm sorry.
[Guest]: So then uske baad, by the time the final placements ka time aaya, it so happened that we were
[Guest]: also the recession year.
[Guest]: So the subprime crisis hit in 2009 and 2008-ish and 2009 was the year of my final placements.
[Guest]: So basically it was like campus pe sanata, day zero pe chaar firms aayi hain, kyuki
[Guest]: baaki toh logon ko Lehman Brothers se PPO holte the, pre-placement offer, ki aapne summer
[Guest]: internship itni achchi kari, ki we are giving you a job right now.
[Guest]: So logon ko Lehman Brothers se PPO aaya, unhone partyan di, saara saar aash kiya aur that
[Guest]: day they are realizing it doesn't exist anymore.
[Guest]: So it was a huge shock for our campus and for like all the IMs were struggling and placements
[Guest]: were down for everybody.
[Guest]: And for me it was, I thought theek hai, anyway apna toh hona nahi saa, badi firms mein toh
[Guest]: kya hi fark padta hai.
[Guest]: But for me by that time, I had kind of made up my mind that I want to join a smaller firm
[Guest]: where first of all, like we said na, headlight fallacy ki itna hi dikh raha hai, toh kya
[Guest]: nahi karna hi dikh raha hai, toh finance nahi karna tha, yeh dikh raha tha, because people
[Guest]: from investment banks would come in their placement talks and tell us with great pride
[Guest]: about how I used to work 22 hours a day and I slept on a couch in my office on the 36th
[Guest]: floor in New York on so-and-so Avenue, and I'd be like, good for you man, I don't want
[Guest]: that life for myself.
[Guest]: So finance nahi karna hai, itna clear tha, so I was like, the other option is consulting,
[Guest]: jaise doctor aur engineer hota hai na, waise finance aur consulting hota hai.
[Guest]: So then I thought, theek hai consulting mein kahin try karenge, maybe in a smaller firm
[Guest]: because like I said, bade wale mein toh apna chance hi nahi hai.
[Guest]: So then I was, I got into this small firm which was, I mean they were, I think they
[Guest]: had 13 employees at that time, and it was the first time they were hiring from IIMs,
[Guest]: and we were brought in, 7 of us were hired from IIM Ahmedabad in Bangalore.
[Guest]: By the 6th month of joining that company, 6 of them had left, 7 mein se, and I was the
[Guest]: only one left.
[Guest]: I think there was a lot also to do with the culture because many of my peers had prior
[Guest]: work experience, so they came with an expectation of what a company should be like, how it should
[Guest]: be run.
[Guest]: Whereas this was a very small firm, and it was very individual driven.
[Guest]: So the founder, his thoughts, his philosophies were how the company operated.
[Guest]: So and everyone had to basically accept that his way is the right way, and the other way
[Guest]: is exit.
[Guest]: So by 6th month, I realized everybody else had left, and they had also, the firm had
[Guest]: decided that IIM people ka culture is not for us, ye log bahut they have, they had their
[Guest]: own rationale for why people quit, and the people who quit are still friends, they had
[Guest]: their own rationale for why they quit.
[Guest]: Anyway, I persevered because I somehow found a middle ground where I was not accepting
[Guest]: complete devotion either, but also not so uncomfortable that I had to move out.
[Guest]: It also helped being a fresher because I had no prior experience, so there was no baseline
[Guest]: with which to compare what a working culture in a professional organization should be.
[Guest]: So 3 years I stayed in that firm, and my client was State Bank of India.
[Guest]: I can say that was now made public.
[Guest]: So there was a project we were doing there called Citizen SBI, which was how do you,
[Guest]: there are I think 2 lakh employees in State Bank of India, and how do you make them all
[Guest]: feel like citizens of State Bank of India, how do you make them think like contributors,
[Guest]: you know, not just like people clocking in and clocking out, but find purpose in their
[Guest]: work and therefore help communities around them.
[Guest]: So great idea, and I did, I was in what they call the business modeling team, which meant
[Guest]: I, you should travel across the country and take pilot projects in various communities
[Guest]: with the SBI branch at the center.
[Guest]: So I traveled to some tapioca farmers in Salem, some petni sari weavers in Nashik, some stone
[Guest]: carvers in Konark in Odisha.
[Guest]: So across the country I would travel to these communities, talk to these people, figure
[Guest]: out what is their value chain, where is the gap, can it be filled with finance or can
[Guest]: it be filled with skill development.
[Guest]: So like stone carvers for example, their big problem is that all the men have migrated
[Guest]: to Rajasthan for carving and all the women or unskilled people are left behind and they
[Guest]: have to manage somehow and there's a lot of problems, migration, poverty, yes sir.
[Guest]: So there was a skill development initiative needed there.
[Guest]: So SBI did a partnership with NABARD and Bhola inko theek hai, we'll do this here.
[Guest]: And I mean there were different inputs that were given, but State Bank kind of was for
[Guest]: the first time thinking from the perspective of the community.
[Guest]: So it was not a sales, typical sales methodology of the calls we get na, madam card lelo, madam
[Guest]: loan lelo.
[Guest]: So it wasn't like that.
[Guest]: I mean I got to see a glimpse of real India right, for the first time.
[Guest]: So far I've only seen this IIT, IIM ka posh world and their own first world problems.
[Guest]: So for the first time I'm seeing what real India looks like, what the problems of real
[Guest]: people of India are.
[Guest]: And I realized that just a financial institution has this immense potential to change their
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: And I would see that there's like legitimate, tangible transformation happening in their
[Guest]: lives and their quality of living, in their income, because of small, small initiatives
[Guest]: that we made like a training program, zara saag.
[Guest]: To us it's nothing and to them it's the difference between two very different standards of living.
[Guest]: And so my mom and dad had mentioned UPSC before, after MBA or around that time.
[Guest]: But I kind of dismissed it at that time as, you know, like you said, old world thinking
[Guest]: ki haan, aapke zamane mein sarkari hota tha, ab nahi hota hai.
[Guest]: And the joke was that somebody from our campus got placed in McKinsey and he told his father
[Guest]: and father said, kya hua, Punjab National Bank hire nahi kar raha tha?
[Guest]: So that was a joke ke our parents' generation doesn't understand what our aspirations are.
[Guest]: So we were kind of all trained to ignore it.
[Guest]: So UPSC ka, they had put it on the table but I had never given it much thought until I
[Guest]: saw this experience.
[Guest]: I had this experience and then I realized that my dad would tell me that he was also
[Guest]: a public sector banker and how the collector would hold meetings of 20 bankers, 20 banks
[Guest]: in front of him or her and tell them ki aap yahaan pe yeh karenge, aap wahaan pe woh karenge,
[Guest]: aap us community ko loan denge, aap ye cheez mein help karenge, yahaan pe disaster hogaya,
[Guest]: yahaan relief mein aap funding karenge.
[Guest]: So like, then I realized that, oh my God, there is an organization behind these financial
[Guest]: institutions which has even more of a transformative power.
[Guest]: So for me, that was the point where I suddenly realized that, you know, this is something
[Guest]: worth trying at least.
[Guest]: I was told when I started applying ke, haan, bohot lamba process hota hai.
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: UPSC is a very long, one-year-long exam and very few people clear it.
[Guest]: And I was working already.
[Guest]: Like, people sit at home for years and years and prepare for it and go to coaching classes
[Guest]: and live away from home in coaching centers.
[Guest]: But and I'm here, I'm like doing a full-time job, traveling around the place and also thinking
[Guest]: ke UPSC kar lenge.
[Guest]: So, reality check shuru se tha, many people have told me, ke bohot kam chance hai, but
[Guest]: try kar lo kya harz hai.
[Guest]: Ek baar try kar lena, nahi hoga, agle saal achche se did dina.
[Guest]: So that was the attitude going in.
[Guest]: And so, the format of UPSC, for those who don't know, I'll just explain is, one, there
[Guest]: is a multiple choice screening test which happens, in my time it used to happen somewhere
[Guest]: around June-ish.
[Guest]: Then around August-September mein uska result aayega, October-November mein there'll be
[Guest]: a mains exam.
[Guest]: Mains exam is nine written papers of three hours each.
[Guest]: I don't want to go into details of what all, but general studies, selective subjects, language
[Guest]: subjects, kar-kar ke nau paper, satta-ees gante ke exams over a week or two weeks.
[Guest]: And woh clear hua toh, screening clear hua toh, mains aur mains clear hua toh, next year
[Guest]: around the same time, March wagara mein aapka interview call.
[Guest]: Aur phir woh bhi clear hua, toh you are in, otherwise agle June mein firse screening likho.
[Guest]: So that's the cycle which many people are in, and often aspirants end up spending five,
[Guest]: six, seven years in that cycle.
[Guest]: So for me, it was a very clear thing ki I didn't want to write it again and again.
[Guest]: I felt like ki yaar, these are my formative youth years, I don't want to spend them preparing
[Guest]: for some exam that nobody gets through.
[Guest]: I'm going to give it one shot, hua toh hua, nahi hua toh, thank you, bye-bye.
[Guest]: So luckily for me, maine kuch prepare nahi kiya tha, but usse saal, there was a thing
[Guest]: introduced called CSAT, which is Civil Services Aptitude Test, which is a cat ka bacha test.
[Guest]: So because maine cat kiya hua tha, that exam was very easy for me and I sailed through.
[Guest]: And later, if you look back around that time, 2012, there were a lot of protests that this
[Guest]: CSAT gives an advantage to people like me essentially, people who have had the privilege
[Guest]: of coaching in CAT and MBA and all that and engineers, because most of Indian students
[Guest]: don't have that.
[Guest]: And for them, cracking a logical aptitude data reasoning exam is, is much harder.
[Guest]: And so anyway, there was a whole protest about that, but I was in that lucky year, which
[Guest]: skimmed through because of that.
[Guest]: So woh hogaya and then I got a call for my mains, that was around August and I was like
[Guest]: kya 2 mahine mein exam hai and these are these 27 hours of paper that I have to write with,
[Guest]: I have zero knowledge right now.
[Guest]: I mean, you have no need to know things like public administration, constitution of India,
[Guest]: freedom struggle of India, woh sab, was the farthest things from my mind, I was living
[Guest]: a very different life.
[Guest]: So I thought ki 2 mahina I'll just take sabbatical and again, thankfully small company, very
[Guest]: personalized culture.
[Guest]: So I told my boss that aisa aisa hua hai, I've gotten through this exam, I want to
[Guest]: give it one serious attempt.
[Guest]: Nahi hua toh I'm coming back to you, can I take 2 months off?
[Guest]: So they were kind enough to say haan theek hai jao, jeelo apni zindagi.
[Guest]: So I came to Delhi and I, so I used to work in Bombay, by the way, all these 3 years.
[Guest]: So I came to Delhi and ghar pe baith ke padhai wadahi shuru kari, thoda bohot pata kiya coaching
[Guest]: centers and people are like, this was in 2011, and people are like, achha aapko 2013 ki
[Guest]: preparation kar diya hai na, aaye aaye yeh enrollment.
[Guest]: So nahi mujhe, 2 mahine baad 11 ki exam ki, they're like, ho hi nahi sakta madam.
[Guest]: People were just on my face, told me ki I don't want to steal your money and then give
[Guest]: you false hope.
[Guest]: Nahi hua sakta.
[Guest]: And then some people did make efforts to steal my money and said, ek lakh rupay de do kar
[Guest]: denge.
[Guest]: So either way, kuch nahi chal raha tha.
[Guest]: Then I found out there was this group circle of fellow aspirants, all of them studying
[Guest]: together and doing group study somewhere in Noida.
[Guest]: So I started, roz apna scooty utha gaye subah ghar se, maha gaye 2-3 ghanta suna baith
[Guest]: ke, kya baatein chal rahi hain, achha Mahatma Gandhi, Champaran Satyagraha, abhi ye baatein
[Guest]: chal rahi hain, chalo thoda bahut sun liya.
[Guest]: And then, I mean, borrow notes from people and someone gave a photocopy of some coaching
[Guest]: class ka notes and wo sab pad liya.
[Guest]: The two subjects I had to take, I chose public administration and sociology, which was a
[Guest]: very idealistic move on my part because I thought I ideally could have taken an engineering
[Guest]: or logical reasoning subject which would have given me an edge, but I was like, ke dekho,
[Guest]: hona toh hai nahi.
[Guest]: Toh why waste reading, time reading stuff that I already know, let me learn something
[Guest]: new about the country, this is a good opportunity to do that.
[Guest]: I'll go back to my job with some value added.
[Guest]: So that's why I took these two subjects.
[Guest]: And then I took one, idhar udhar se photocopy notes, Police Act of 1861 mein kya hua tha,
[Guest]: usme ye uske flaws kya hain, aur future mein kya reforms are necessary, so and so committee
[Guest]: iss saal mein baith ki unke ye recommendations the, over 200 years, all the recommendations
[Guest]: that have been given and ignored by government of India, wo sab pada, things like that, very
[Guest]: very hardcore stuff which normal people, engineers, MBAs don't know this stuff, right, like I
[Guest]: didn't.
[Guest]: So wo sab I got very familiarized with all that.
[Guest]: I think my writing really helped because my writing skills are decent and I'm able to
[Guest]: express complicated thoughts, process them into simpler words and churn out a very understandable,
[Guest]: comprehensible presentation of it.
[Guest]: So that really helped, I think, with me.
[Guest]: That was my biggest strength.
[Guest]: So somehow I cleared mains and that was very shocking to everyone, including myself.
[Guest]: Ki iska kaise ho gaya, ye toh, abhi toh aayi thi.
[Guest]: And then I remember I had had a minor surgery on my leg and I was like, wo kharke, I was
[Guest]: bedridden and wheelchair chal rahi thi ek hafte tak.
[Guest]: And I was, tab khabar aayi that you've cleared and I was like, days, then I said, acha, and
[Guest]: then I passed out again because I was under a lot of pain medication.
[Guest]: And then I woke up and I was like, I had this weird dream.
[Guest]: And my parents were like, nahi sahi me hua hai, it wasn't a dream.
[Guest]: So then within a month I had that interview.
[Guest]: So I took thoda extension of that leave for my surgery and gave the interview and it was
[Guest]: a very, I mean, luckily I'd heard all these horror stories about stress interviews and
[Guest]: all, woh bahut interview aur uth ke beech mein chala jaata hai, tum pe chillane lagta
[Guest]: hai, ye sab aisa kuch nahi hua, they were very civil and nice and we had a good conversation
[Guest]: about my academics, my IIM experience, going to Germany, ye sab baate baate hui, thoda
[Guest]: bahut aaj ki newspaper se ye pada, wo cheez ka reform batao, uske baar mein tumhara, some
[Guest]: textbook questions that are there.
[Guest]: For the most part I did well, I thought, and actually I did quite well because ultimately
[Guest]: I cleared it and when the mark sheet came, I realised that I'd only just made it through
[Guest]: the mains exam with a very small margin, but my interview went really exceedingly well,
[Guest]: which is why I finally made it to the cut off.
[Guest]: So interview mein I might have been among the toppers in the country, but because mains
[Guest]: was very bare minimum passable marks.
[Guest]: So my rank was I think some 601 or something and there's only 1000 civil servants selected
[Guest]: in a year, out of, by the way, 6 lakh applicants in my year.
[Guest]: So I was selected and I got into this animal called the Indian Information Service, which
[Guest]: I had never heard about, nobody's heard about it, let's be honest, I'll give one toffee
[Guest]: to any listener of Seen and the Unseen who writes back saying mujhe pada tha yeh service
[Amit Varma]: ke baare mein.
[Amit Varma]: Ab kitne toffee doge, mere listeners ko kaafi kuch pata hai, especially those who've done
[Amit Varma]: my course and rewritten that press release I used to give you guys to rewrite from the
[Amit Varma]: Indian Information Services itself.
[Guest]: I'm so grateful it wasn't one of my press releases that you were giving as an example
[Amit Varma]: of bad writing.
[Amit Varma]: Were they really so bad?
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, just for the benefit of my listeners, to give an example of what a bad sentence
[Amit Varma]: is and what a bad paragraph is, I take, you know, in my course, I take examples from a
[Amit Varma]: particular press release written by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
[Amit Varma]: And it so happens that you also work there and wrote press releases for them.
[Guest]: I did, I did.
[Guest]: And when you gave us that assignment, I was like, link kholo jaldi se, meri toh nahi kahi
[Guest]: press release, which is being shared as an example of bad writing and people are going
[Guest]: to rewrite it.
[Guest]: And luckily, it wasn't and it was a very good example of bad writing, I have to say.
[Guest]: So, haan, so I got into this service and then it was, ke yaar hua toh hai nahi, aaye is
[Guest]: kya fark padta hai, chh rahne dete hain, jaane dete hain.
[Guest]: And then people advised ke nahi, dekho, try toh kar lo, ek baar join toh kar lo, let's
[Guest]: see, nahi hua toh chhod dena and ho gaya.
[Guest]: If you find it good, it can be life-changing, which it obviously is.
[Guest]: And the, I did a little bit of digging into it and found out what, what this service does
[Guest]: in the first place, hi hota kya hai.
[Guest]: And I thought that basically it's a service that handles all the media of the government,
[Guest]: which is Doordarshan News, All India Radio, DEAVP, which was, which is an organization
[Guest]: now called, I think BOC, which is now, an organization which does all this chhapoing
[Guest]: of government ads, which you see all over, a bit of community radio or some grassroots
[Guest]: communication also.
[Guest]: And press releases, of course, PIB.
[Guest]: So Press Information Bureau is the PR agency of Government of India in a way.
[Guest]: And that's the agency which organizes press conferences with ministers and you write press
[Guest]: releases for your ministry and that's how the media gets to know what your ministry
[Guest]: or what the government is doing.
[Guest]: So I was like, ek potential, one thing that really attracted me for this service was that,
[Guest]: you know, making people aware of their rights.
[Guest]: The grassroots communication, which is a very small part of it, was the one that attracted
[Guest]: me the most because I felt like, as an, as an Indian, I don't know what are the schemes
[Guest]: that the government has.
[Guest]: And of course, I'm privileged enough to not need many of those benefits also.
[Guest]: But even people who do need those benefits genuinely are often not aware that these are
[Guest]: the things that are our rights and we can demand these rights from the government, ki
[Guest]: hume ghar mein shochale chahiye, hona chahiye, we need it, we want it, it is our right.
[Guest]: Something like this, people don't have the awareness to even, let alone demand, the agency
[Guest]: to demand the right, not even the awareness to know the right.
[Guest]: So for me, that was the big hook and attraction of this service, that I can generate public
[Guest]: awareness about rights of citizens.
[Guest]: And so I thought, theek hai, kar lete hain, join.
[Guest]: And that's how I got in the long answer to your short question about how UPSC happened.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I won't call it a long answer, because it's a long journey.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the journey is like that, what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: So how was it in the civil services?
[Amit Varma]: Like once you're actually in the machinery, you know, did you feel frustrated that it's
[Amit Varma]: not making as much of a difference as it can?
[Amit Varma]: Or did you feel proud of the difference that you were making?
[Amit Varma]: And what is it that then prompted you to kind of look elsewhere and eventually kind of quit
[Amit Varma]: the civil services?
[Guest]: So this is another very long story.
[Guest]: So basically I get in, September of 2012 is when the training started.
[Guest]: So first you have to do a three-month foundational course training, which every service has to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And after that, depending on what service you are, you do a specialized training.
[Guest]: So there's IAS, IFS, IPS, un sab ki apni-apni academy, apni-apni training ho rahi hai.
[Guest]: But shuru mein, everyone congregates in one academy, used to congregate in one academy,
[Guest]: which was the Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy in Mussoorie.
[Guest]: Now as the batch, that was when the batch sizes were 200-300 people, your dad's time
[Guest]: maybe.
[Guest]: Now as the batch sizes have grown, they are not able to fit everyone in Mussoorie.
[Guest]: IAS, IPS, IFS, fahan jaayenge pahad mein padhne, baaki log jahaan jahaan girenge, maa girenge.
[Guest]: So I fell in Nagpur.
[Guest]: There is an academy called National Academy of Direct Taxes, which is the specialized
[Guest]: academy for IRS, income tax service.
[Guest]: And wahan pe, they used to do foundation course for some other leftover services, which included
[Guest]: mine.
[Guest]: And lot of my batchmates were from Forest Service, which was very interesting because
[Guest]: they have, they are the only service which has a different exam.
[Guest]: All the rest of us came from one exam, UPSC ka.
[Guest]: So Forest Service people were, a lot of batchmates were from the Northeast and it was a good
[Guest]: experience that way.
[Guest]: Three months we spent together and it's very intensive, they will take you on a trek
[Guest]: to the Himalayas and then they do one Bharat Darshan, I've traveled to Andaman and Leladakh,
[Guest]: everything in one, happening in one month, you're traveling here to there.
[Guest]: So it was very, very intensive and very interesting.
[Guest]: And then, but yeah, there was one thing that was disillusioning right from the beginning,
[Guest]: which is when I came in and I came in with these naive idealistic notions of the why
[Guest]: would be the same for everyone, that why is, why do you join civil service, to serve your
[Guest]: country, to do better for society.
[Guest]: For me, that was the most obvious answer.
[Guest]: When I come in, I realize that I am a very small minority, the people who've come in
[Guest]: with that perspective.
[Guest]: So a lot of people have come in for power, a lot of people have come in for prestige,
[Guest]: some people have come for corruption.
[Guest]: So some people have come just for, ab hum unko dikhayenge, jino ne humein press kiya.
[Guest]: And I mean, at the outset, obviously, there's this judgmental lens, which I'm already bringing
[Guest]: in, right, that my way was better than their way.
[Guest]: But when you talk to people, and you hear their life stories, you realize that you asked
[Guest]: me earlier about how our upbringing shapes us, you know, and that's, this is a very stark
[Guest]: example of it.
[Guest]: And I think we've discussed this before offline, which is, like one of my batchmates told me
[Guest]: that he's from what is called the backward caste and wo boltha hamaare gaon mein we were
[Guest]: always treated as untouchables, humari maa ko khana nahi milta tha, humko itni mushkil
[Guest]: se bada kiya, and ye caste wali log humko dabate the, ab hum unko dikhayenge, ab hum
[Guest]: unko dabayenge, ab main gaon jaunga, laal batti ki gaadi mein aur main unko dikhaunga.
[Guest]: So I mean, like I'm saying, you know, from a very urban and this idealistic mindset of
[Guest]: all is good with the world, it seems very shady ke arey aap yahan pe power aur dabane
[Guest]: ek doosre ko aayo, ye petty politics karne aayo, desh ki seva karo.
[Guest]: But when you get to know their stories, you realize that, well, if you were born in that
[Guest]: place, you might also have grown up thinking like this.
[Guest]: So it's all logical, but it's also unfortunate.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of this thing about arey IS ko laal batti ki gaadi milti, humein kyu
[Guest]: nahi milti hai, hum is service mein hain, hum bhi toh ye kar rahe hain, hum itne senior
[Guest]: officer hain, humara, jab hum office aayenge toh humara dabba uthane ke liye ek peon aana
[Guest]: chahiye neeche, humein gaadi ka darwaza koi aur kholega, hum kyu kholege, hum desh ke
[Guest]: civil servant hain.
[Guest]: So I mean, there's a lot of that, which is the overwhelming majority.
[Amit Varma]: Is it literally at that kind of comical level that I want someone to pick up my tiffin box,
[Guest]: I want someone to open the door of my car?
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: Yeah, those are like real, very tangible, not just benefits, but reasons why people
[Guest]: come in.
[Guest]: That I don't want a job where hoga McKenzie bohot bada crorepati, par wo toh khud apna
[Guest]: darwaza kholta hai gaadi ka, mera darwaza koi aur khodlega aankhe, chahiye I'm earning
[Guest]: 10% of what that person does.
[Unknown]: Wow, so sad.
[Guest]: Yeah, but for the majority of India, that is the aspiration still.
[Guest]: And even dowry, for example, is a big motivator, ke dowry ka rate card hota hai aadmiyon ka,
[Guest]: aapko shayad pata hoga.
[Guest]: Even in IIM, my male batchmates would discuss it, ke IITN ho gaye, ek crore dowry ho gayi,
[Guest]: ab IIM bhi kar liye, ab do crore dowry ho gayi.
[Guest]: Ab iske upar civil service kar lo, toh soch lo kya ho jayega, hai na?
[Guest]: Toh phir politician ki beti se shadi kar lo, phir wahan pohat jao, baad mein mantri ban
[Guest]: jaoge, toh phir life toh take off kar gayi ekdum.
[Guest]: So all of these are life plans that people come in with.
[Guest]: And genuine, serious life plans, it's not comical to them, it's very serious.
[Guest]: People live these lives and people see real value in it.
[Guest]: And again, from their perspective, it makes a bit of sense also, as unfortunate as it
[Guest]: is for the country.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's also where I met Salil, my husband, because he was in income tax doing
[Guest]: his specialized training there, two years senior to me.
[Guest]: And I think I was talking to him last night about what I'll tell you about how we met
[Guest]: and I said that, you know what, whether we like it or not, we bonded a lot over this
[Guest]: solitude that we both felt, you know, that we are like these, I don't want to make it
[Guest]: sound too dramatic, but we are these people, few hand-picked people, you can count them
[Guest]: on fingertips, who have genuinely come here with that perspective, who want to learn,
[Guest]: who want to listen in class, how can I contribute in my service in the future, who are not here,
[Guest]: let's bunk the class, it's done now.
[Guest]: So you know, that clearing of UPSC, the big difference is, there is a small group of people
[Guest]: who see it as the beginning of their journey, but there's an overwhelming majority who sees
[Guest]: that as the culmination.
[Guest]: Now life is set.
[Guest]: Now we don't need to study, we don't need to work hard, this is what we were aiming
[Guest]: for, this is why we slogged for five years, seven years at home, and finally we've made
[Guest]: it in life and this is it, life has come to a full stop.
[Guest]: Now we have to enjoy it.
[Guest]: So as, I'm sorry, I'm sure I sound very ungrateful to the environment.
[Amit Varma]: No, this is a great frame of looking at it, you know, for some people it's a start, for
[Amit Varma]: some people it's the end, or you could say for some people it's a means to an end, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you wanted it because you want to make India better, while for some people it's an
[Amit Varma]: end in themselves, they want it, that someone will open the door of the car.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Now, you know, Mr. I think you've interviewed Mr. Jayaprakash Narayan, so the only function
[Guest]: where I was invited as a for felicitation, because I was in Bombay and there was a college
[Guest]: in Pune for governance, and they said that the people from Bombay-Pune area will be invited.
[Guest]: I mean, by the way, in real India, people are washed with milk, and they are worshipped,
[Guest]: and their aarti is performed, and there are big rallies that our boy has cracked UPSC.
[Guest]: Anyway, I was obviously a very urban, lost in crores of people in Mumbai, one of them,
[Guest]: so I was surprised that somebody even knew that I lived in Bombay and invited me to this
[Guest]: thing, and he was there to kind of welcome the youngsters joining the service, and he
[Guest]: gave an address there, which to this day I remember, he said, there are three things
[Guest]: that you need as a civil servant, one is integrity, which is basic, he's like, this is hygiene,
[Guest]: so don't go out being very proud about, I am a very honest officer, this is the bare
[Guest]: minimum for you, and he's like, I know plenty of honest officers who go to office with their
[Guest]: lunch box and come back home, so they didn't do any work, so what's the point of honesty,
[Guest]: you're garrowing a huge flag of it.
[Guest]: Of course, many people don't even meet that criteria, but that is, for you, it should
[Guest]: be a hygiene, it should not be something to feel pride in.
[Guest]: Second is competence, which is often very badly lacking, and I want to circle back to
[Guest]: that, which is the point I sent to you about problem with UPSC and therefore the country.
[Guest]: Anyway, second is competence, that you should be able to do your job or be willing to pick
[Guest]: up the skills needed to do it.
[Guest]: And third was the willingness to contribute.
[Guest]: So you can be very competent and honest, but still not make an effort, because like I said,
[Guest]: this job is incentivized to be a culmination, because you'll meet 60-year-old, 65-year-old,
[Guest]: 70-year-old men who still remember, that 35 years ago, I had written a public administration
[Guest]: exam, and I had scored this much in that exam, and if I had scored 2 marks more, then my
[Guest]: rank would have been this, and I would have gotten this service, and I would have gotten
[Guest]: this carder.
[Guest]: It's insane to me that I have met 60-65-year-old men who remember their scores from UPSC.
[Guest]: I have forgotten my score, but people remember, and that too in a sectional, in a subject
[Guest]: paper, if this mark had come, then this impact in life.
[Amit Varma]: Because counterfactual is so big, you know, that a person is writing press releases, but
[Amit Varma]: you know, a little difference, he could have been in the IFS, he could have been chilling
[Guest]: in London.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: So this is what I was saying, the incentive is, so this is not the fault of the people
[Unknown]: in the system, it's the fault of the system, right.
[Guest]: So you're basically, those marks in that one exam, basically seal your fate till retirement.
[Guest]: So unless you do something to change your trajectory, like foolish people like me do,
[Guest]: but if you don't do that, your trajectory is pretty much decided now for the rest of
[Guest]: your life.
[Guest]: Even your retirement age, at what position you'll retire, what money you'll be making
[Guest]: at that age, you can all predict everything on day one in the academy when you're in your
[Guest]: training.
[Guest]: So because all of that is figured out, and there's going to be time-bound promotions.
[Guest]: Unless you murder somebody, you might not be, you will not be fired.
[Guest]: Unless you're too honest, you might be fired.
[Amit Varma]: Unless you get caught murdering somebody, murder someone tu theek hai na, isme kya hai
[Guest]: yeh tu.
[Guest]: Good point.
[Guest]: Very good, important clarification, unless you get caught.
[Guest]: There was a guy who sexually harassed a girl in my batch and people saw it also, like she
[Guest]: was sleeping, we were on our way to the track and he came and he grabbed her from behind
[Guest]: while she was sleeping.
[Guest]: And it was sexual harassment, there are eyewitnesses, his own batchmates know it.
[Guest]: The girl felt it, woke up, caught him, red-handed, no action was taken.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because kaun karega itna paperwork, agli 20 saal tak hum log ko yaha bulaya jayega Nagpur
[Guest]: mein gawahiyan dene.
[Guest]: Even the girl is like, yaar, mera toh poora career yahi ban jayega, isi ke waale me gawahi
[Guest]: dena.
[Guest]: So now that person is a civil servant in government of India, getting his dabba picked by somebody.
[Guest]: So I mean, that's the way the system is designed.
[Guest]: It is designed for you to be complacent and not want to grow, not want to contribute.
[Guest]: So that was what Mr. Jayaprakash Narayan had said, those three things which I still remember
[Guest]: to this day, that model office.
[Guest]: And I often look at people from that lens also and I find that one of the three or sometimes
[Guest]: many, more than one of the three are lacking in many officers, sadly.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, JP is one of the wisest people I've met.
[Amit Varma]: I did a great episode with him, episode 149, and just one of the wisest people.
[Amit Varma]: But the question I'd therefore throw at you, and I don't remember if I've asked him this,
[Amit Varma]: but perhaps I will next time.
[Amit Varma]: But the question I'd throw at you then is that, okay, agreed that these are basic things
[Amit Varma]: that you need integrity, you need to build the ability and the skill and you need to
[Amit Varma]: have the willingness.
[Amit Varma]: But all of these, in my view, depend on incentives.
[Amit Varma]: If the system is designed well, if it is structurally what it should be, then all three of these
[Amit Varma]: will flow automatically into every single person because you'll be incentivized to be
[Unknown]: that way.
[Amit Varma]: And right now, it clearly isn't like, A, there is too much power, which, you know, your incentives
[Amit Varma]: are therefore for rent seeking, for corruption, for using that power for your own benefit.
[Amit Varma]: There's too little accountability to kind of stop that.
[Amit Varma]: And these are just very broad observations I'm making from the outside.
[Amit Varma]: But having actually been an insider within the system and thought about it the way you
[Amit Varma]: have, you know, what would you say are the fundamental structural things that are wrong
[Amit Varma]: with the system the way it is?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what are the, what are the key things you would change in it if you could?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I didn't stay long enough in the system to do an analysis beyond what I have
[Guest]: so far.
[Guest]: But I'll tell you what I have so far.
[Guest]: First step itself is the exam is wrong.
[Guest]: One exam for a 23 or something services, right?
[Guest]: So you are all writing the same exam.
[Guest]: All of you have the same dream, which is IAS, collector banna hai, laal batti, gaon mein
[Guest]: jaake my baap bannege, log humare pyaar pakdenge, hum unko relief denge.
[Guest]: And for various other things, somebody wants to contribute as a collector, somebody wants
[Guest]: to have their dabba picked as a collector, doors open.
[Guest]: But for various reasons, everyone wants IAS, right?
[Guest]: Or some people want IFS, which is for London mein wine peeenge.
[Guest]: So again, not to belittle people's drivers, they are genuine, very good civil servants
[Guest]: I know who have great reasons for wanting these things.
[Guest]: I was one of them.
[Guest]: I wanted IAS for that reason, contribution.
[Guest]: But you have these 25 other services, which nobody else is thinking about, which all of
[Guest]: these people who want one service are going to fall into one of those buckets.
[Guest]: So shuru mein hi uss job mein ek insaan aa raha hai, jise woh job chahiye hi nahi thi.
[Guest]: For whom that job was never a dream, it was never a priority.
[Guest]: And because it was never a dream, then not something that they wanted, they are often
[Guest]: also not suited for that job.
[Guest]: So you will have all sorts of people randomly falling in all different buckets.
[Guest]: And it's a lot of chance, right?
[Guest]: On that day.
[Guest]: Like I know a senior of mine who likes to say ki us din examiner ghar pe jagda karke
[Guest]: aaye tha aur uski gobi kacchi bani thi aur uski upar fan nahi chal raha hai, isli tumhare
[Guest]: marks kam aa gaye, kyuki wo gusse mein usne check kiya tumhara paper.
[Guest]: Aur tumhara doosre peers ka, usne kisi tumhara peer ne ganda paper likha, but uska exam paper
[Guest]: went to an evaluator who was in a great mood sitting in an air-conditioned room eating
[Guest]: a pizza.
[Guest]: So he's happy and he gave good marks.
[Guest]: So it's a very, very luck-based system, right?
[Guest]: Which is fair, theek hai, it's a large-scale exam.
[Guest]: There will be an element of luck, like you said, in everything in life there is.
[Guest]: But you have this luck-based system se people randomly falling in random buckets, right?
[Guest]: And so now an accountant falls in the bucket of police officer.
[Guest]: The person who didn't want that job is not, is not designed for that job physically, mentally,
[Guest]: and is just not geared up for the requirements of being a police officer, is randomly put
[Guest]: in that role now.
[Guest]: There were people in my service who didn't know what email is, and they are now supposed
[Guest]: to communicate for Government of India.
[Guest]: Like I used to literally after hours teach extra classes to my peers ki chalo bhaiyon
[Guest]: thodi baith jo ek email sikha deti ho, aapko ek cheez hoti hai, kyuki you are going to
[Guest]: go and handle communication for this country.
[Guest]: As my contribution in this, at this stage, I can't do much, but at least I can educate
[Guest]: my peers about something.
[Guest]: So these are people who never wanted to write, who have no interest to this day in writing,
[Guest]: in communicating.
[Guest]: But I was luckily someone who had a communication mindset who fell accidentally in this bucket.
[Guest]: But plenty of people who had no inclination or desire to do this with their lives have
[Guest]: fallen into this bucket.
[Guest]: So that's why I said the forest service peers were a great experience for me because they
[Guest]: were people who wanted forest service, you know, they were zoology, biology, graduates,
[Guest]: they were people from the northeast who had grown up in forests and knew that economy
[Guest]: of a forest, how that value chain works, how those communities function, what is the importance
[Guest]: of protecting wildlife, what is a difference between a sandalwood tree and a neem tree,
[Guest]: which person like me has no idea.
[Guest]: But I will never accidentally fall in the forest bucket because I didn't write that
[Guest]: exam.
[Guest]: They have fallen into that because they consciously chose to write that exam.
[Guest]: So the first thing that I think this country needs to change big time is have separate
[Guest]: exams for each service.
[Guest]: If you are a person who wants to do asset liability, taxation, you should write the
[Guest]: IRS exam.
[Guest]: If you're an English graduate, then don't write that IRS exam, you're not suited for
[Guest]: it, you don't even want to do it, you won't be happy doing it and you'll do a bad job.
[Guest]: So that's number one to me.
[Guest]: Biggest flaw is this one gateway for multiple entries.
[Guest]: And which is why people other than IAS, usme bhi log dhukhi hain, but other than IAS, zyadatar
[Guest]: log are spending their life in grief and what ifs.
[Guest]: What if I had got two more marks more in geography paper, then I would be there, not here.
[Guest]: And it's unfair to that office that a person who has no inclination of being there, who
[Guest]: doesn't take pride in that office, and who doesn't take the potential of that office
[Guest]: and the responsibilities of that office seriously is sitting in that office for the next 30
[Guest]: years, mind you, with no way of moving away.
[Guest]: Skipping forward to the reason I quit was also this because I would see seniors who
[Guest]: were 30 years, 35 years senior to me and still talking about marks.
[Guest]: There was a, I remember ek INB secretary ka farewell tha.
[Guest]: This is the other thing, ke secretary IAS banenge.
[Guest]: So an IAS person who has spent their life in the INB ministry will never rise to the
[Guest]: secretary of that ministry.
[Guest]: The secretary will be someone who's come from rural development agriculture ministry.
[Amit Varma]: So generalist over specialist always.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: So it's not even about, that's not the lens, the lens is IAS over everything, right.
[Guest]: So that supremacy, that lobby has been very tightly controlled and will probably not change
[Guest]: in our lifetimes even, I have low hopes.
[Guest]: But that needs to change.
[Guest]: You need to have people who are specialists working in those roles and rising to the top
[Guest]: in those roles so that they know the issues at the bottom.
[Guest]: Anyway, so this INB secretary who was an IAS was retiring and I was one of the officers
[Guest]: in the ministry.
[Guest]: So I was called for the farewell.
[Guest]: Toh farewell, lunch wa gaira hua and then sir was asked to make a speech and in his
[Guest]: speech he was basically, wo starts with those words of inspiration, the random stuff, but
[Guest]: a usual stuff.
[Guest]: But then ultimately after a while I realized this is a consolation speech he's giving
[Guest]: because he's telling us that you should have pride in what you do, you should not
[Guest]: take it to heart that you didn't make it and I was like, make it where for a second
[Guest]: and then I realized he's talking still about, woh tumhare waha pe marks nahi aaye the acche,
[Guest]: toh isliye ab is aadmi ko apne retirement ke din pe bhi wahi marks yaad aare hain and
[Guest]: even as an IAS he's giving us consolation and I see my seniors with their heads hanging,
[Guest]: taking that consolation and thinking haan amare saath hua toh bohot bura but you're
[Guest]: right, maybe we should take heart in this.
[Guest]: People who are living with such deep regret should not be in these offices, they are doing
[Guest]: an injustice, a disservice to the office.
[Guest]: And so I would see that, I mean I tried to, tried a lot to make change happen, tried a
[Guest]: lot to reform things, but then reform would happen when it would come from the top.
[Guest]: Like 2014, Modi government comes and says, social media karna hai, toh suddenly sabko
[Guest]: karna hai.
[Guest]: Usse pehle I was putting proposal pe proposal that we should have a more active presence
[Guest]: on social media, nothing, no change, ye tum bachon ka kuch khel hai, we are not interested,
[Guest]: you youngsters only know, we don't know what this is.
[Guest]: And fair point, you don't know, but that's not a good enough reason to not do something
[Guest]: that is useful for the service for the country.
[Guest]: But then when it came from the top, it happened and overnight everyone was on Twitter.
[Guest]: So that's when I realized ki yaar, I'm just spending a lot of my productive years
[Guest]: and energy and effort and passion into just pushing against a wall that's not going to
[Guest]: move because of my push.
[Guest]: So the job I was also in, after my training ended, I was, around that time was May 2014.
[Guest]: And during my training itself, I had done these on-the-job training rotations.
[Guest]: And in DD News, I had launched a campaign on sustainable urban transport, like from
[Guest]: scratch I read up on the subject, I went and interviewed experts and I would take a camera
[Guest]: team with me to shoot their interviews.
[Guest]: And then I got funding from, allocated from DD News to, ki yeh karenge chaar hafte ka
[Guest]: campaign.
[Guest]: I personally got like Rahul Bose ko phone kar ko aake uska kahin se manager ka number
[Guest]: dhoond ke, got him as our host for the show.
[Guest]: Got all these experts from various fields, talking about non-motorized transport, need
[Guest]: for bicycle tracks on our roads, need for more buses instead of more metros.
[Guest]: How highways are not going to solve the problem of traffic jams because that is like trying
[Guest]: to put out a fire with petrol.
[Guest]: So, all of these concepts which are not obvious to most of us, I educated myself on them and
[Guest]: then I worked on designing a campaign.
[Guest]: And that caught the eye of one of my seniors, who was, once the new government came in in
[Guest]: 2014, he was posted in the PMO.
[Guest]: So, he said that I want these two-three young officers in my team.
[Guest]: So, I was one of those people handpicked for this thing.
[Guest]: And then I got posted in PIB in Prime Minister's office.
[Guest]: So, basically handling PMO's publicity for PIB.
[Guest]: So, those press releases I would write would be, Shri Narendra Modi went today to Madison
[Guest]: Square Garden and delivered an address and yeh wo.
[Guest]: So, it was a obviously very, very prestigious job and arguably the best job you can have.
[Guest]: Actually, the best job you can have at that age and stage of your career in that service
[Guest]: was what I got right out of academy.
[Guest]: Actually, I wasn't even allowed to finish academy, they said we are picking you out
[Guest]: of the process.
[Guest]: Karne toh baaki training poori, tum aajao bahar.
[Guest]: So, I was pulled out of the academy middle of my training and picked up for this.
[Guest]: So, it was a huge honor, obviously, very, very prestigious and, but over time, what
[Guest]: started happening was that I, we used to have this very hectic lifestyle, you know, get
[Guest]: up at 4 a.m., 3 a.m. kyunki 4 a.m. tak office pohoshna hota hai and then you make a media
[Guest]: report for the Prime Minister, ke subah jab wo uthenge, toh wo kitni akbaare ek insaan
[Guest]: padhega, unke paas time nahi hai.
[Guest]: So, I would read 20 newspapers, Hindi, English, vernacular, put together news that is being
[Guest]: written about the government, about the Prime Minister, about so and so ministry, about
[Guest]: yesterday's event that happened, what people are saying about his speech, things like that,
[Guest]: like make a full digest that goes to the PM and with their morning chai, the Prime Minister
[Guest]: reads this.
[Guest]: So, this has been happening forever, it's not new to this government, but I was like
[Amit Varma]: in that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it's a physical digest of everything.
[Guest]: No, it's a like a, it's a word document, you write like 20 pages.
[Amit Varma]: And then they print it out.
[Guest]: And then they print it out and serve it to him with his morning chai.
[Amit Varma]: So, you got to be there at 4 in the morning doing this.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So, by the time he wakes up, it has to be ready.
[Guest]: So, that was like a very, and shift based system.
[Guest]: So, there is that morning shift, then there's a day shift, and then there's a evening shift.
[Guest]: And then with this PM, he did a lot of international travel.
[Guest]: So, sometimes you're up at 2 a.m. tweeting about something because he's talking in Madison
[Amit Varma]: Square Garden.
[Unknown]: Did you write his tweets?
[Guest]: Not his tweets, PIB.
[Amit Varma]: PIB tweets.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So, PIB underscore India.
[Guest]: I was not in the PM, I was in PIB handling PMO publicity, so some distance was there
[Guest]: for better or for worse.
[Guest]: I had that job.
[Guest]: And so, that job, the analogy I use is like, you know, if you had a nuclear power button,
[Guest]: nuclear bomb button, and you had to pick a person to be in charge of that button, you
[Guest]: would pick probably the best person you can think of, the most competent person.
[Guest]: But think about now their life.
[Guest]: What is their job description?
[Guest]: It is very high stress, there is no scope to make a mistake, there has to be immediate
[Guest]: action to any issues that come up.
[Guest]: But ultimately, they're just sitting and looking at a button, right?
[Guest]: So, their life is going to be boring.
[Amit Varma]: No, I would love that job because I would decide mentally, that I'm never pressing the
[Guest]: button.
[Amit Varma]: But it's like, you know, sometimes the button gets pressed, then you have to quickly unpress
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Something like that.
[Guest]: There is quick action required on multiple fronts.
[Guest]: So, it's a busy job.
[Guest]: It's not a job where you're reading a book.
[Guest]: It is a job which is hectic, but it has the ultimate nuance of it is that you're in charge
[Guest]: of not letting disaster happen here, right?
[Guest]: So, speed and accuracy were two things that were needed in that job.
[Guest]: So, obviously, they picked the best people they could think of for that job.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, the job for me was very, very passive.
[Guest]: So, after a point, it becomes a job that you can pretty much do on autopilot.
[Guest]: So, over time, I felt like I'm not really, there's no challenge to it beyond a point.
[Guest]: My brain is not developing, I'm not learning anything new.
[Guest]: It's the same thing that I have to do over and over again.
[Guest]: There is zero scope for mistakes.
[Guest]: It's always urgent, because always right now, PM is making a statement at 8pm, so it's very
[Guest]: high stress.
[Guest]: It is any hour of day or night, 24-7, he's working, so you're working.
[Guest]: And then ultimately, you're not really learning anything new beyond a point.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I would get, highs are there that sometimes a call would come from PM, that
[Guest]: PM has read your report and was praising you, that this is very well written, this is how
[Guest]: officers should write.
[Guest]: So, then you get a high that, wow, he praised me personally, I wrote something that was
[Amit Varma]: in his hands.
[Amit Varma]: Did you ever meet him?
[Guest]: I was in the same room as him often because of events and all, but not one-to-one, never
[Guest]: met him.
[Guest]: But events and all, every event that he did in Delhi, we would have to attend and immediately
[Guest]: again write press releases and do media management and all.
[Guest]: But anyway, so, it was a very, very, like I said, prestigious and honor to be given
[Guest]: that job.
[Guest]: So, ultimately, I felt like I was mentally decaying.
[Guest]: And also, in parallel was this thing happening of me trying to keep my brain alive by pushing
[Guest]: for these reforms in the system, right, which I said were going nowhere.
[Guest]: Because I saw that it's not, self-esteem is so low of the service itself.
[Guest]: And that's true of many services which are not IAS, I mean, some people have like, thodasa,
[Guest]: I think IRS IT has a little, police obviously has pride, but beyond a point, other services
[Guest]: often feel like we are the word that is used, IAS allied service, that we can't say IAS,
[Guest]: we will say IAS allied to ourselves.
[Guest]: That itself shows a little bit of, you know, low self-esteem.
[Amit Varma]: It's like people who live in Juhu, Barsova, Link Road, which is actually Andheri, they'll
[Guest]: say we live in upper Juhu, so it's like allied Juhu, you could say.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So, I mean, that, so that, that itself shows that there is lack of pride in what you are,
[Guest]: where you are, and that shows in all your work also.
[Guest]: So ultimately, there was like a corridor in Shastri Bhavan, and I could see my future
[Guest]: for the next 30 years, that first I am in this room, then I will go to the next room,
[Guest]: then to the next room, then end of the corridor, there is a palace of the senior boss, my life
[Guest]: will end there.
[Guest]: So it was like very depressing, that thought.
[Amit Varma]: And there are some, there's some intern will come to you saying, let us reform the services
[Amit Varma]: like this.
[Guest]: And you will be like, if I had scored more than 2 marks in geography, then I wouldn't
[Guest]: be in this room, and I wouldn't be listening to that stupid person who says, we'll change
[Guest]: the world by tweeting.
[Guest]: So anyway, so yeah, I mean, all of those factors kind of combined, and I felt like it was not
[Guest]: the best place for me anymore.
[Guest]: And the interesting thing is that when I decided to quit, most of my seniors were very supportive
[Guest]: of it, they were even enthusiastic of it.
[Guest]: Some of them would even message me, to this day, some of them messaged me that you took
[Guest]: such a courageous step that we could never take, and I wish at your age I had done this.
[Guest]: And then I had, of course, an exit interview with our MOS, who was Mr. Rajvatar Singh Rathore.
[Guest]: And then the minister, Mr. Arun Jaitley, he signs off finally on your resignation.
[Guest]: And then, uske baad, bye bye.
[Guest]: There were some people also who got very offended by my decision.
[Guest]: And again, I felt like that showed a bit of low self-esteem when you are offended by somebody
[Guest]: else's life decision about themselves that, you know, it's like, if I say that, I, Amit,
[Guest]: I started a podcast, now I'm ending it and you feel offended.
[Guest]: Aise kaise tum podcast end kar doge?
[Guest]: What does that say about me?
[Guest]: Are you saying that my life choice is wrong?
[Guest]: You know, that's the sort of place that this comes from.
[Guest]: So, I've had also seniors who would make me sit in their room and not sign my file because
[Guest]: I used to physically go with the file, ki mujhe nikalna hai because I have another job
[Guest]: lined up to join.
[Guest]: And please yeh sign kar do, I used to physically go from office to office with my resignation
[Guest]: file.
[Guest]: So, I used to get these two extreme opposite reactions.
[Guest]: One was so much pride, full support, I wish I had done this.
[Guest]: And the other was, how dare you, tumhain himmat kaise hoi?
[Guest]: What do you think of yourself?
[Guest]: And you know, like, really personal stuff like that, I'm like, sir, just sign the file,
[Guest]: I've never met you before, I don't intend to meet you again.
[Guest]: Why do I matter to your life so much?
[Guest]: I am a makhi, just haath maaron, nikalon kamre se baar.
[Amit Varma]: Yeh kaise log hai?
[Amit Varma]: Kabhi kabhi mujhe lagta hai ki matlab inke dimaag mein kya chalta hoga?
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of narratives brewing in their mind that they can react the way they
[Amit Varma]: do?
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: So, we've sort of reached, you know, a critical turning point in your life, where you turn
[Amit Varma]: your back on the evil Indian state.
[Guest]: Are evil mat bol raha hai.
[Guest]: I know I probably come across as really ungrateful and there are probably civil servants listening
[Amit Varma]: to this who are feeling like, kya, what is this ungrateful, thankless gal?
[Amit Varma]: Ek toh yeh main bol raha hoon aur doosra main kya bol raha hoon ki whatever my judgment
[Amit Varma]: on the state is, I never extend that judgment to the people working within it.
[Amit Varma]: I still have many good friends, Salil included, who are part of the Indian state and they
[Amit Varma]: are wonderful people.
[Amit Varma]: But the state is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: But is baat pe ek choti si break lete hain aur break ke baad we'll talk about writing
[Amit Varma]: and womaning, the two big Ws.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I have taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing.
[Amit Varma]: An online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST or about $150 and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with the famous Mahima Vashisht once upon a time you'll remember people joined
[Amit Varma]: coaching classes because Mahima Vashisht yaha aati hai.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi log scene unseen sunenge Mahima Vashisht yaha aati hai.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you sort of left government for the reasons you sort of described with great
[Amit Varma]: eloquence.
[Amit Varma]: But after that, before you kind of came to where you are, you spent a few years working
[Amit Varma]: with Swachh Bharat as well.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about how you kind of got into that, what that journey was like, and so on
[Guest]: and so forth.
[Guest]: So like I said, I joined the government with a certain contributive aim in mind and I was
[Guest]: somehow feeling that it was not getting fulfilled.
[Guest]: So at least the results were not proportionate to the efforts and it seemed at some point
[Guest]: that my efforts were actually meaningless in the larger scheme of things.
[Guest]: The country was going where it would go, it's not like the civil services were going to
[Guest]: lose out on a big thing if Mahima Vashisht was there or not.
[Guest]: So with that, again, the same aim in mind of having an impact, I decided that maybe
[Guest]: you know, I'll try my luck in the development sector.
[Guest]: And I fortunately, around the time when I was contemplating and going through that inner
[Guest]: turmoil of to stay or not to stay, I also, I started talking to friends and peers about
[Guest]: the development sector and I found out that Tata Trusts was, had just been rebranded as
[Guest]: Tata Trusts.
[Guest]: So earlier they were these Jamshedji Trust, JRD Trust, very like some 20-25 trusts left
[Guest]: by various people in the Tata lineage.
[Guest]: And Mr. Ratan Tata was, had now recently co-branded them as one umbrella Tata Trusts as the brand
[Guest]: and everything is under it.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of reorganization happening because each trust had its own mandate, its
[Guest]: own leadership and people were brought together, lot of change management happening inside
[Guest]: and they wanted to bring some young blood also.
[Guest]: So they were looking for people to hire and coming from a government background also gave
[Guest]: me a certain edge, so I was offered a position in that team.
[Guest]: So I literally just, I think my resignation got accepted on 30th November and 1st December
[Guest]: I joined Tata Trust.
[Guest]: So for a few months I was still figuring out my place, I was working with some dual leadership,
[Guest]: one boss in Delhi, one boss in Bombay, it was working, not working, kuch kuch.
[Guest]: Then one day the CEO of trusts called me and he said that there is a new leadership in
[Guest]: the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation and they work on Swachh Bharat Mission and
[Guest]: they are looking for the, essentially there was a new secretary and he's been brought
[Guest]: as a lateral hire, he's not come up the IAS ladder.
[Guest]: Although he was ex-IAS, he left, went out and worked in the World Bank in the US and
[Guest]: various other countries and now he's been brought in laterally to lead the Swachh Bharat
[Guest]: Mission and he, because for him coming back to the government is a change, he wants people
[Guest]: to come manage his office and help him set things up.
[Guest]: So jao zara ek do hafta unki help kar do because you are familiar with the government system
[Guest]: and then you can come back and resume what you are doing here.
[Guest]: So like theek hai, I went, three of us were asked to go and he had said I want some youngsters
[Guest]: and one was a very young colleague, another was a fresh IIM graduate and third was, I
[Guest]: was the senior most in that team.
[Guest]: And the three of us went and we sent our CV and everything to him and I was very impressed
[Guest]: that this is a secretary who replies to email first of all.
[Guest]: Literally, a secretary who checks his own email is a very rare species in government
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: And I remember I emailed him at night and within half an hour I got a response from
[Guest]: him and he had clearly like got it on his phone, which is an accomplishment again, email
[Guest]: on their phone.
[Guest]: Not have a PS jo kamre ke bhaar baithe aur Monday ko print out lekar aaye sir ye email
[Guest]: ka, not that, so very impressed.
[Guest]: And then, so we went in and so he was a career sanitation person because he had worked in
[Guest]: the World Bank as in the sanitation sector and then he was clearly very knowledgeable
[Guest]: about the sector and he had very clear ideas on where he wanted to take things.
[Guest]: And basically Swachh Bharat Mission was as we know launched on 2nd October 2014 and this
[Guest]: is happening in March 2016 and by this time, if you look at the data, the coverage hasn't
[Guest]: moved much.
[Guest]: So, the sanitation coverage of India at the time of independence was like 1%.
[Guest]: So, 1% of Indians used the toilet and had access to a toilet even.
[Guest]: Then over the years, still various sanitation programs happened in the country, Nirmal Bharat
[Guest]: Abhyaan, usse pehle Total Sanitation Campaign, usse pehle kuch aur kuch aur.
[Guest]: And over the years, coverage had come up only to 38% when as of Swachh Bharat launch.
[Guest]: So, now the mandate given by the Prime Minister is paath saal mein ODF India, which is Open
[Guest]: Defecation Free India and they had set themselves a very high bar of 100% coverage.
[Guest]: So, I mean in some countries, ODF, Open Defecation Free is also defined when you achieve 70%
[Guest]: coverage that okay, not enough people are anymore going out in the open to cause serious
[Guest]: risk of diseases and infectious diseases.
[Guest]: So, this is the, some threshold they decide, everybody agrees on ki haan, yahan tak pahunch
[Guest]: pehle toh we'll call it ODF.
[Guest]: India mein they went full ke hum dekh lenge, 100%.
[Amit Varma]: 100 kya, 110% karenge.
[Guest]: 110 karenge.
[Guest]: Toh policy likte time na, hum log bahut ambitious ho jate hain, mission launch ho gaye, we'll
[Guest]: call it a mission not a scheme, right.
[Guest]: So, these things, uss saam mein hum full josh mein aake 100% bol diye hain.
[Guest]: Aur ab hum 38 se abhi tak 50 pe bhi nahi paunch paaye, 2 saal nikal gaye hain.
[Guest]: So, that was the condition in which he had taken over and Mr. Parmeshwar Nair, by the
[Guest]: way, his name I should have taken before, so he was, so he was very clear ke I am going
[Guest]: to meet this target and the career bureaucrats before me have not taken this seriously because
[Guest]: they've been like, dekho, first of all, sanitation is a state subject, toh hum baithe hain haan
[Guest]: Delhi mein states ko, jab karna hoga kar lenge.
[Guest]: Jab funding ka request aayega, hum sign kar denge file, toh ho gaya humara kaam.
[Guest]: So that was the attitude before him, which is why we were where we were.
[Guest]: So his thing was ke nahi, I have, I have been brought in for, on a contract.
[Guest]: This is my main aim.
[Guest]: Even if my contract gets extended, mujhe 2019, 2nd October ko ODF India chahiye hi chahiye,
[Guest]: karna hi karna hai.
[Guest]: So then, and he wanted his team to have the same enthusiasm, which is why he brought in
[Guest]: fresh blood from outside because he was like, the current setup is of that mentality and
[Guest]: so he did a lot of transfers and brought in new people and in the government service also.
[Guest]: And so over the years, then he was very, we were quite aggressive and like we would call
[Guest]: up collectors and be like, ye percent pe kyu ho, ye person se aage wo percent ho rachi
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: And I was working a lot more on the communication side of things because I had that background
[Guest]: of government communication.
[Guest]: So I worked a lot on campaigns for Swachh Bharat Mission.
[Guest]: So you might have seen Darwaza Bandh, Amitabh Bachchan ka campaign, which is about ke toilet
[Guest]: ka darwaza bandh karo, essentially.
[Guest]: And there was a bit of gender that I had brought in in that, lengths that I had brought in
[Guest]: there also.
[Guest]: So there was, there is this instance that I want to highlight to kind of like give an
[Guest]: example of the kind of work I was trying to do.
[Guest]: So Nirmal Bharat mein, there were these ads, right?
[Guest]: Ek Vidya Balan ka ad hota tha.
[Guest]: By the way, full love, I am a big fan of Vidya Balan, but woh jo ad tha, that had some issues.
[Guest]: Toh ad mein, she was a school teacher type, chashme wali lady, who goes into a village.
[Guest]: Typical government ad ki gaon wale beb koof hote hain aur shahir wale aa ke unko samjhate
[Guest]: hain ki jeevan aise jeena chahiye tumhe.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: We will impart our urban wisdom and teach them how to live their life.
[Guest]: So that was the typical model which all government ads have followed.
[Guest]: Usme bhi ye hi tha.
[Guest]: And then this ad is called Dulhan ki Vidai, aisa kuch naam hai iska.
[Guest]: So the ad mein kya hai ki ek shadi ho rahi hai aur dulha dulhan baitha hu hai mandap
[Guest]: mein, saas baitha hai side mein, ladke ki maa and ladki bolti hai mujhe paani peena hai.
[Guest]: Toh koi paani ka glass laata hai aur woh ghoongat pehna hua hai usne, lamba, toh ghoongat utha
[Guest]: ke paani peeti hai.
[Guest]: And then the saas is immediately like, ishara karti hai ki neeche karo, ghoongat neeche.
[Guest]: And then, so Vidya Balan notices this with a critical eye.
[Guest]: And then later she says ki bahu ko shauchale jaana hai.
[Guest]: Toh saas bolti ki shauchale kahan humare hain toh hum aisi bahar jaate hain.
[Guest]: Toh woh bolti ki bahu fir toh tum ghoongat bhi khol do, kyuki ek taraf toh inko tumhara
[Guest]: paani peene ke ghoongat uthana bhi gawara nahi hai, dusri taraf ye chahate hai ki tum
[Guest]: bahar jaa ke khule mein shauch karo.
[Guest]: Toh, I mean, that ad is supposed to say use a toilet obviously, but it's also in a way
[Guest]: saying that aur toh ka ghoongat pehna is fair as long as there's a toilet at home, rakho
[Guest]: unhe ghoongat, bandi wana ke, right?
[Guest]: So it's not thinking that, but it is unintentionally saying that.
[Guest]: So for me, a big part of it was also that there is this entire narrative about women
[Guest]: being victims.
[Guest]: Ke the victimhood of women, hamari mataon aur bhehnaon ko toilet nahi milta hai, bechari
[Guest]: subhe tak rok ke rakti hain, bahot peeda hoti hai, bahot dukh milta hai unhe, unki izzat
[Guest]: hume bachani hai, toh this mataon bhehnaon narrative really irritates me, first of all,
[Guest]: because you should respect people because they're people, not because you have relatives
[Guest]: of that gender.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Nobody says ki iss aadmi ka murder hone se rakho kyunki humare bhaiyon aur baapon ki
[Guest]: raksha karne hai.
[Guest]: No one says that.
[Guest]: But aur toh yaar, there's always a mataon bhehnaon narrative.
[Guest]: So that was one thing that I didn't like, and also there was painting of women as these
[Guest]: passive victims who are sitting at home waiting to be rescued by the men.
[Guest]: So I mean, my sense was that rural women have far more agency and they are able to even
[Guest]: lead this movement because their incentives are aligned, it is in their interest.
[Guest]: They don't want to go out and get assaulted by men in the dark in the fields because they
[Guest]: went outside.
[Guest]: And there's all sorts of things, there's animal attacks, there's children being kidnapped.
[Guest]: I think there was that rape in one UP district where these girls had gone out basically for
[Guest]: open defecation and it became a very, there were these very violent images that came out
[Guest]: also later about how their bodies were hung from a tree or something.
[Amit Varma]: Sonia Falero wrote a book about it called The Good Girls and I had an episode with her
[Unknown]: on this as well.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So obviously, it is in the interest of women, in greater interest of women, because they
[Guest]: stand much more to lose their suffering much more.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that they are going to be passive victims sitting at home waiting
[Guest]: to be rescued by their men.
[Guest]: They can also lead this movement mostly because also they are mothers and they know that when
[Guest]: their children fall ill, how it affects their children.
[Guest]: And at this point, as a mother, you have this drive, this agency to protect your child.
[Guest]: And if nothing else, not to protect themselves, at least to protect their children, they will
[Guest]: want toilets and they can become champions of the movement.
[Guest]: So that was the lens with which I wanted to communicate about Swachh Bharat.
[Guest]: And so we got Anushka Sharma as the brand ambassador.
[Guest]: So while everybody was very gung-ho about Amitabh Bachchan and very, very cool of Mr.
[Guest]: Bachchan, he did it for free as he does with most government campaigns, and every brand
[Guest]: ambassador does it pro bono.
[Guest]: But then I wanted one woman ambassador who talks about this message also.
[Guest]: And so there's an ad of Darwaza Band campaign featuring Anushka Sharma where you see women
[Guest]: who are, you know, gheraing around a man who's going with a mug outside in the jungle.
[Guest]: And there's these wives who have chained the mugs to the toilet.
[Guest]: So the man tries to yank the mug away to go in the fields and he's not able to.
[Guest]: And then two men look at each other that both our wives have chained and they're saying,
[Guest]: please go use the toilet.
[Guest]: Because we were also finding the data was showing that even once you build a toilet,
[Guest]: it is the able-bodied young men who are the last to adopt.
[Guest]: The senior citizens will adopt, the differently abled will adopt, children will do it, women
[Guest]: will do it, but the young men are the problem area.
[Guest]: So I said, women are not the problem, men are here the problem, so let's target men
[Guest]: as the target segment which needs to change their behavior instead of saying, bichari
[Guest]: aurat ki izzat bachalo.
[Guest]: Because that messaging also means you build a toilet and then you go out in the jungle
[Guest]: because you built it for your wife, not for yourself.
[Guest]: And open defecation is one thing which affects everyone.
[Guest]: It's not that I went out in the field and so only my health is affected because ultimately
[Guest]: it's going to spread diseases which will come to everyone's house.
[Guest]: So it's a community-wide effort.
[Guest]: If even one person is going out, that was the message at least we said behind 100% coverage
[Guest]: that even if one person goes out, your health is affected.
[Guest]: And then there was a lot of learning around this sector.
[Guest]: I remember the openness with which in that ministry we used to say the word tatti after
[Guest]: a while.
[Guest]: For the first time I remember there was this expert brought in who would keep saying the
[Guest]: word tatti, tatti and I was giggling behind, I had to stand behind a colleague because
[Guest]: I couldn't stop giggling and I thought it was unprofessional, but then again no one's
[Guest]: heard of this talk in a boardroom setting.
[Guest]: But it was a lot of fun, it was a lot of learning about again, you know, real issues of real
[Guest]: India and how these issues are cross-cutting, they affect your family health, your finances.
[Guest]: Because for a poor family, if a person who's earning falls ill x times a year, that much
[Guest]: time of income doesn't come in, plus expenses of healthcare, women's agency to go out and
[Guest]: work is limited if children are constantly falling ill in the house.
[Guest]: So all of these things are interlinked with one little cause, which seems very banal at
[Guest]: the outset, kya hai ek toilet bana do.
[Guest]: So it was a great learning experience, five years.
[Guest]: So I was there till 2020 and yeah, I mean, we declared India ODF and all the reality
[Guest]: is obviously different.
[Guest]: I mean, the National Family Health Survey recently came out and said it's not ODF, but
[Guest]: that's beside the point.
[Guest]: I think a lot of, the mission gets a lot of flack for this because we trapped ourselves
[Guest]: into the narrative of ODF India karna hai, but that's not really the point.
[Guest]: The point is that nowhere in the history of mankind, of humankind, has there been a government
[Guest]: program that has led to this much change in sanitation coverage of this many number of
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: So at the time we began, 650 million people, Indians would go out and defecate in the open
[Guest]: and basically 1 billion in the world.
[Guest]: So every second person defecating outside in the morning was an Indian.
[Guest]: So that was the extent of the problem at that time and even if we've not solved it 100%,
[Guest]: we've solved it 70%, 80%, it's something to be applauded, it's something to be celebrated.
[Guest]: So the narrative of 100% versus other, well, not 100% is not the point which should be
[Guest]: debated, but it is worth celebrating.
[Guest]: I mean, whatever is your politics and I also have opinions on the politics of this government,
[Guest]: but this mission has been an unqualified success in my view.
[Guest]: If you look at it that way about the number of lives it has touched and improved forever.
[Amit Varma]: And one, you know, even if one opposes ODL, we can still support ODF, ODL being audio
[Amit Varma]: leader of course.
[Unknown]: Yeah, you looked a little stunned there.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, ODL and ODF, but you know, it's also worth underscoring that that little point
[Amit Varma]: you made that, you know, open defecation affects everyone and an illness can be of great consequence
[Amit Varma]: to a poor family.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think we city elites really understand how devastating a small illness can be, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I think economists use a term, I think welfare shocks, that essentially, you know,
[Amit Varma]: an illness can lead to a welfare shock in the sense that you can actually fall back
[Amit Varma]: into poverty, and then coming out can take another generation, you know, a slow movement
[Amit Varma]: upwards can suddenly reverse so hard.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, just so many people in cities, honestly, if they have a medical emergency,
[Amit Varma]: even they themselves will go broke in a day, right?
[Amit Varma]: So when you think of the poorest of the poor, it's just way worse, it can be devastating
[Amit Varma]: and something like this has a great impact.
[Amit Varma]: I'd done an episode on Swachh Bharat India a long time back with Shruti Rajgopalan, where
[Amit Varma]: the fundamental point she was making is that some of it was posturing in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: sure you build the toilets and you put the commodes in, you know, whatever, but the underlying
[Amit Varma]: drainage system wasn't there.
[Amit Varma]: And because the underlying drainage system wasn't there, the caste system got perpetuated
[Amit Varma]: because you inevitably have people from the lower caste forced to then come and take the
[Amit Varma]: refuse away.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, a lot of the change was cosmetic, because people still kept going out.
[Amit Varma]: I think this episode would have been in 2018 or something.
[Amit Varma]: So possibly, you know, you were there till 2020.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe you guys managed to, you know, do something about the deeper underlying issues.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, first of all, there is no sewage network in a rural area.
[Guest]: It's too partially populated to justify the cost of laying down sewage pipelines.
[Guest]: And it's too dynamic because new households are coming up every now and then, when one
[Guest]: family, two sons are separated, two houses are built suddenly, right.
[Guest]: So it's a moving target.
[Guest]: So building a sewage system is impractical in most rural parts of India.
[Guest]: So what we did have was a twin-pit toilet system, which is that under the toilet only,
[Guest]: under the ground, there is a system.
[Guest]: And the system is that there are two pits.
[Guest]: So first all the waste flows into one pit, it fills up and the pit has a mitti ka bottom.
[Guest]: So that pit fills up, you kind of just call your mistri and switch the drainage to the
[Guest]: other pit.
[Guest]: And that one pit fills up takes five years.
[Guest]: And then the second pit filling up will take five years, utti der mein this first pit would
[Guest]: have leached down into the ground and would have composted.
[Guest]: And in an ideal well-constructed twin-pit toilet, that compost will become like manure,
[Guest]: which you can use in the fields.
[Guest]: So anyone can empty it and in fact, we went to several places, we've got our minister
[Guest]: at the time, Mr. Narendra Singh Tomar, Akshay Kumar, the CAG of the time, my boss, the secretary
[Guest]: himself, all of them, we've got these iconic people to go into a pit, pick out that waste
[Guest]: with their hands and just to showcase that it is safe and it can be handled.
[Guest]: And we even did an ad about that featuring Akshay Kumar and Bhoomi Pednekar later after
[Guest]: the toilet movie came out.
[Guest]: So just to highlight this, that this waste is safe to handle.
[Guest]: So that's the, like I said, it's an ideally constructed, correctly constructed twin-pit,
[Guest]: which I agree, sometimes the pit is not correctly constructed or people will just construct
[Guest]: a single pit ke, bahut ghera gadda bana do ji, bhare hi na, agli 20 saal tak na bhare.
[Guest]: Wo itna ghera gadda banate hain, to then it leaches into the water table, the waste, and
[Guest]: it can contaminate your water.
[Guest]: So there's technical issues with it.
[Guest]: But theoretically, that model exists and was the one that we at least pushed from Delhi
[Guest]: and most states did adopt it, if not all.
[Guest]: The second question was about caste.
[Guest]: Caste is a very real problem that cannot be disentangled from sanitation.
[Guest]: And it's even worse in urban areas where you see manual scavengers going inside the
[Guest]: septic tanks and not coming back, right.
[Guest]: There were so many deaths of sanitation workers in Delhi alone in the recent past.
[Guest]: So obviously, caste is not an issue that you can ever disassociate from it.
[Guest]: Having said that, there were critics that, academicians who we worked with at that time
[Guest]: and we would consult them, but often found their way of doing things to be very idealistic.
[Guest]: So the purest view is, first you solve caste, then you solve sanitation.
[Guest]: That is the purest way of approaching it, ke pehle caste system hatao, aur ye bolo ki
[Guest]: koi bhi toilet saaf karega, uske baad toilets banao, so that anyone is actually, you know,
[Guest]: the way Shruti has perceived the toilets to be cleaned and managed.
[Amit Varma]: This was not at all her position because you have to tackle all problems simultaneously
[Guest]: and obviously you're not solving caste in a hurry.
[Guest]: So that's what, I mean, I haven't heard that episode, so I don't know Shruti's position,
[Guest]: but she's right about caste being deeply entangled with it.
[Guest]: But the purest view of caste system ko jab tak solve nahi karenge tab tak India ODF nahi
[Guest]: hum sakta was like, we don't have 200 years to wait around to do that.
[Guest]: So we were like, ke dekho, we have a limited frame of window, paanch me se bhi 3 saal bache
[Guest]: hain, and we have to do this.
[Guest]: At least construct the infrastructure for it and do a certain amount of behavior change
[Guest]: communication to change people's behavior and encourage use of these toilets.
[Guest]: And beyond that, I think problems like caste are going to get solved as we develop, as
[Guest]: we get more educated as a society.
[Guest]: It's going to happen in its course of time and hopefully we'll have some accelerators
[Guest]: along the way.
[Guest]: But it was not something that was in our area of control or could have been practically
[Amit Varma]: been impacted by Swachh Bharat.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Quiz question for you.
[Amit Varma]: If David Lynch was making a TV series in India today, what would he call it?
[Amit Varma]: Twin Pits.
[Unknown]: Oh.
[Amit Varma]: He made a famous iconic series called Twin Peaks in 1990.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: That I should, you know, not do any more of these in this episode.
[Guest]: So many evolved jokes are lost on me.
[Guest]: Can I have a DDLJ joke?
[Guest]: I'll get it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry.
[Amit Varma]: I'll do my best to come up with a DDLJ joke by the end of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about your writing.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So, you've mentioned earlier that you used to write a diary daily from the 3rd standard,
[Amit Varma]: you used to do journaling, you know, your first published essay was in the 4th standard
[Amit Varma]: and it was about fake news or advertising and lies and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so tell me a little bit about your writing journey.
[Amit Varma]: Like what drew you to writing?
[Amit Varma]: Did you always want to be a writer?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of writer did you want to be?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how fundamental was that a part of what you wanted out of yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did you always see yourself, at least in part, as a writer?
[Guest]: So yeah, I told you beforehand about my earliest memories of writing and 3rd standard, my English
[Guest]: teacher, she used to compulsorily write a page of a diary every day.
[Guest]: And I was, as the class topper, designated the class monitor who had to check other people's
[Guest]: diaries.
[Guest]: I used to have like a lot of, I think that teacher gave me a lot of anxiety because I
[Guest]: used to wake up in the middle of the night and check whether I had written or not.
[Guest]: I was like, it was a problem, a serious problem.
[Guest]: But anyway, so that was my first introduction to disciplined daily writing.
[Guest]: And like you said, 4th standard, I got published and I was very proud that in the school magazine,
[Guest]: there was a thing about how, it was a very cute essay, I came across it recently, that's
[Guest]: why I still remember it, which is about how, you know, mom says we should not tell a lie,
[Guest]: but then how is Colgate also number one toothpaste and Close Up also number one toothpaste.
[Guest]: As a child, I'm seeing on TV, various guys are saying I'm number one, someone is lying.
[Guest]: So what's going on in the world of adults?
[Guest]: It was very cute.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, I used to get these small encouragements, I think, from my environment
[Guest]: about, yes, she is good at English, she writes well.
[Guest]: And then cut directly to college where all those magazines and all those things happened.
[Guest]: I was a chief editor of an official magazine and an unofficial magazine.
[Guest]: So a lot of work about collecting, not only writing yourself, but also editing other people's
[Guest]: work and encouraging others to write.
[Guest]: So there was a bit of element of that as well.
[Guest]: And that was, in my memory, it was one of the most fun highlights of my college life.
[Guest]: So there was a bit of attraction to writing at that point.
[Guest]: And soon after I left, I think that was when the blogging culture had reached us, which
[Guest]: is when I set up my first blog.
[Guest]: And then I wrote probably 100 posts in 10 years.
[Guest]: It was that intermittent, itna ruk ruk ke kabhi kabhi, kuch idea aaya toh likha aur when
[Guest]: I've traveled or I've seen something, sounds like my newsletter now, you're being very
[Guest]: productive other than that, right?
[Guest]: Creatively, I was doing nothing else.
[Guest]: I was just doing my padhai, likhai, job, bob, yahi sab.
[Guest]: So there was not, I mean, I used to feel like when the inspiration strikes, I'm able to
[Guest]: get up and write.
[Guest]: And sometimes in the middle of the night, an idea will come and I'll get up and write
[Guest]: and go back to sleep and it'll be excellent.
[Guest]: At least from that lens, today, I see them in cringe, but at that time, it used to be
[Guest]: like aacha likha hai.
[Guest]: But it was very, very few and far between, those writing forays.
[Guest]: And then it was never a thing ke haan mujhe writer banna hai, like you had probably, ke
[Guest]: main naukri chod ke writing karungi, aisa nahi tha kabhi.
[Guest]: Very, like I said, wo middle class work aatha kehna hai, ki naukri toh chahiye, salary toh
[Guest]: aani chahiye.
[Guest]: But haan, yeh ek cheez hai jo mujhe, which gives me true joy.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just like unadulterated joy.
[Guest]: I'm getting nothing else out of this.
[Guest]: But I like writing.
[Guest]: I like it when other people like my writing and when people find it funny or people say
[Guest]: they, it moved them or it taught them something that they, made them think in a way that they
[Guest]: hadn't thought before.
[Guest]: And then in parallel, I was having this whole gender evolution also, right, like coming
[Guest]: to those realizations that kuch toh galat hai, bohot kuch galat hai, sab kuch galat
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: So that, that was happening separately.
[Guest]: But then at some point, I think the two got combined and then, then womaning is what happened
[Amit Varma]: after that.
[Amit Varma]: In your notes, you've mentioned that we met many years ago at Nilanjana Roy, who's been
[Amit Varma]: a guest on the show, Nilanjana and her husband DD's house.
[Amit Varma]: And I gave you some rude writing advice.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I have no memory of this, except that I must have said something and you later remembered
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: So maine kya bola tha?
[Guest]: Kya hua tha?
[Guest]: Yeh tha.
[Guest]: So I was there as, I was there as Salil's plus one, right?
[Guest]: Like I was just a person who didn't belong.
[Guest]: So I felt like I was just, ki main kahan aagayi hoon, yeh kya baatein chal rahi hai, log French
[Guest]: and Latin mein baat kar rahi hai, for all I can understand.
[Guest]: Because there's like really very, I mean, refined, cultured people talking about books
[Guest]: and authors that I have never heard of, very, I felt very, very pedestrian there, which
[Guest]: I was obviously, still am.
[Guest]: But so I think I had read your book long back, My Friend Shancho.
[Guest]: And then I was like a little, kya arey, oh Amitabh is coming there and Salil was like,
[Guest]: yeah, yeah, he's my friend.
[Guest]: And I was most impressed that my husband is friends with such illustrious people.
[Guest]: And so then he said, come, I'll introduce you and we came over to you and I, something
[Guest]: we got talking about government work, which both of us were babus at the time.
[Guest]: So we were talking about my work and all, and then I said that I've read your book and
[Guest]: I said something, I also like to write, I want to write.
[Guest]: And so you are the first, you said, so why don't you?
[Guest]: I was like, so offended, how dare he, why don't you, because it was really, truly the
[Guest]: most pragmatic advice and that's to this day, the advice I would give to other people who
[Guest]: would come to me and say that you write womaning and I also want to write, the very, the truest
[Guest]: and purest advice is why don't you, because writing is just that, right, it's a verb,
[Guest]: it's a course, being a writer is like not a noun, it's a verb, it's a thing of doing.
[Guest]: I did this class before yours, a course in which somebody said that writer is the one
[Guest]: profession to which most of the people that claim they belong to that profession don't
[Guest]: actually practice it, right.
[Guest]: Many people will say I'm a writer, but they don't actually do the verb of writing.
[Guest]: And that's where the entire secret of good writing or any writing is that you have to
[Guest]: sit, park your Tashrif in a chair and do it.
[Guest]: Because I was, I mean, basically, I was not doing it.
[Guest]: And you told me to do it.
[Guest]: Obviously, it was not offensive as much as it was very, very pure and I felt like, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: he's right.
[Amit Varma]: Why, what is stopping me?
[Amit Varma]: You know, now that you mention it, and I can see why I might have said that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is rude.
[Amit Varma]: Just looking back, because I think it's something you can say from a position of privilege where
[Amit Varma]: I was a master of my own time, ki mujhe agar routine banani hai ki har rosh 3 ghante mein
[Amit Varma]: badd ke likhunga, I can make that routine.
[Amit Varma]: You know, other people necessarily can't, lives are complicated.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the struggles that writers face, especially women face when they're juggling
[Amit Varma]: so much, is ki time kaha se banaye, mind space kaha se banaye, you know, you have so many
[Amit Varma]: things going on that you just don't have that.
[Amit Varma]: And taking that into account, this is not something I should have said.
[Guest]: So you know, today.
[Guest]: No, no, no.
[Guest]: But it was true, right?
[Guest]: See, if I'm aspiring to be a writer, then it is the purest advice there is.
[Guest]: Of course, there is context and I had a whole other life, I was a very high stress job at
[Guest]: the PMO at that time and all, but sach hai, sach toh sach hai.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in case any listeners are surprised that you mentioned a book of mine and why don't
[Amit Varma]: I talk about it.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote this book in six weeks in 2009, and I should never have published it.
[Amit Varma]: I think I embarrassed myself.
[Amit Varma]: But unfortunately, I showed it to publisher friends and there was a bidding war and it
[Amit Varma]: kind of it happened.
[Amit Varma]: I got carried away in the moment, not close enough to sort of see the wood for the trees.
[Amit Varma]: And I always keep saying that I will redeem myself one day, which I promise you I will.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not really something that I'm particularly thrilled about.
[Guest]: No, it was a fun book.
[Guest]: I liked it a lot.
[Guest]: Even now, sometimes I see a chhipkali and I think, oh, my friends are there.
[Amit Varma]: There's a chhipkali in the book.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about womaning then.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned that these separate things are coming together and that one is that you're
[Amit Varma]: thinking of all of these issues, right?
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, you're a writer, you write, you like writing, however, your track
[Amit Varma]: record of writing is 100 posts in 10 years, right?
[Amit Varma]: So how is it coming together in your mind?
[Amit Varma]: Is it like one of these hawa mein thoughts ki kisi din mai likhungi or, you know, how
[Amit Varma]: does when does it start to fructify and become a concrete thing?
[Amit Varma]: And when does that earth get so much that, you know, the verb takes over from the possibility
[Amit Varma]: of the noun in terms of writing and writer?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So for womaning, the idea came to me at a very particular moment, which I have identified
[Guest]: and remember.
[Guest]: So I was Swachh Bharat mein in our office.
[Guest]: We would do a lot of, like I said, travel to districts and all.
[Guest]: And a couple of us had gone out to various parts of the country and we had converged
[Guest]: back in Delhi to report our findings and all.
[Guest]: And so we were all having lunch and informal conversation was happening, kya kya dekha,
[Guest]: kaha rahe, kaisa raha, yeh wo.
[Guest]: And then I had said, I think at that point, that I was put up in, it was a small town
[Guest]: and I was put up in a hotel room where, you know, there is an auto lock in the door.
[Guest]: So it's not a kundi.
[Guest]: It's a lock that just with the, you turn a knob and that's a lock.
[Guest]: Basically that means it's a lock that can also be opened from outside.
[Guest]: The kundi is the only thing, the latch is the only thing that is a hardware between
[Guest]: you and a person outside who has the master key.
[Guest]: So I said, I was, I was a bit terrified because the hotel was not the most unshady ones out
[Guest]: there and the staff was, I was a little concerned for safety.
[Guest]: And so raat ko main, I, maybe I overreacted, but main raat ko table, ek furniture, der
[Guest]: darwaza ki against laga ke soyi, ke agar koi room mein ghusega toh at least I'll wake up
[Guest]: with the noise, like that.
[Guest]: And I thought that I was like, you know, I've said before that women think that these experiences
[Guest]: are unique to us.
[Guest]: And I thought I was the only paranoid person out there doing such a thing.
[Guest]: But then there was another woman at that lunch table and who said, arey yeh same thing happened
[Guest]: with me also.
[Guest]: I also do this.
[Guest]: Often I go to, whenever I'm traveling to these chota, small town mein chota hotel where
[Guest]: safety is not a big guarantee, I also do this, mujhe bhi kundi pasand, agar kundi na ho toh
[Guest]: I am also stressed the entire night, I can't sleep and sometimes I put furniture, sometimes
[Guest]: I just don't sleep and things like that.
[Guest]: And then ek ek karke two three women said, oh me too, me too.
[Guest]: And then there was this one guy who was there and he was like, did you guys like plan this
[Guest]: beforehand?
[Guest]: Is this a prank on me?
[Guest]: Because what are you all even talking about?
[Guest]: I can't relate at all to this.
[Guest]: If never, this thought has never crossed my mind.
[Guest]: For me, somehow that moment was a, I mean, obviously there's history behind it.
[Guest]: But that is when the coin dropped in my mind.
[Guest]: Is the expression coin dropped or what?
[Guest]: Pin dropped?
[Amit Varma]: Something dropped in my mind.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, we get it.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: So, kuch chamka mereko.
[Amit Varma]: Light bulb chamka.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, haan, kuch chamka.
[Guest]: So, chamka yeh ki there is this whole life that women are living and we are living so
[Guest]: close to each other.
[Guest]: We are sometimes husband and wife cohabiting and father, daughter, brother, sister living
[Guest]: together in the same house, having such starkly different life experiences or colleagues working
[Guest]: in the same office.
[Guest]: Having itna different experiences that women are seeing a whole different side of the world
[Guest]: that men are just not seeing.
[Guest]: And even the most well-intentioned men out there who are like, oh women, full support,
[Guest]: feminist, even those men are often just unaware of it.
[Guest]: It's by no fault of their own.
[Guest]: They've not had that experience and they're unaware.
[Guest]: So, for me, that was a bulb moment that I felt ki ispe likhna chahiye.
[Guest]: I should just talk to women and get these stories about things that women experience
[Guest]: and it's very common between us and which men probably haven't thought of.
[Guest]: And so, for me, because I had thought about feminism and I mean, I don't like to use that
[Guest]: word because that word now means different things to different people and many people
[Guest]: are all actually aligned to the thought of it, but just don't like the word because they
[Guest]: interpret it differently.
[Guest]: But either way, I had thought about writing about gender a lot and I used to think, you
[Guest]: know, people write either about data, which is not my forte, I'm not a data scientist
[Guest]: and I'm not the most knowledgeable person on that front.
[Guest]: Some people write opinion pieces, but opinion mein yahi ho jata hai ki yeh toh is ladki ko
[Guest]: opinion hai.
[Guest]: I disagree.
[Guest]: Baat wahi khatam.
[Guest]: So, that's why for me, it was that ek toh meri apni writing mein, I feel like I'm more
[Guest]: of a storyteller than a very concrete opinion writer and otherwise also, I find that stories
[Guest]: are much more powerful.
[Guest]: So, there was this documentary, it's on Netflix, Inside Bill's Brain, about Bill Gates.
[Guest]: Usmein, there's one of the, there are these four episodes, I think, usmein se ek episode
[Guest]: mein Bill Gates and Melinda, now Melinda French Gates, they're together talking about an issue.
[Guest]: I think it was malaria in African kids.
[Guest]: I'd forget the exact issue, but basically what they were saying was that Bill Gates
[Guest]: would see data, k so many thousands of children losing their lives to malaria or diarrhea
[Guest]: or whatever it was, and he would get moved by the data.
[Guest]: But Melinda would say, said that for me, the numbers weren't so real until I traveled to
[Guest]: Africa and I've met one mother who had lost one child.
[Guest]: And for me, that moved me so much that it ultimately led to the setup of the Bill and
[Guest]: Melinda Gates Foundation.
[Guest]: So, for me, that was another Chamko bulb, light bulb moment because I felt like stories
[Guest]: have so much more power than data, even though objectively thousands of children dying is
[Guest]: worse than one child.
[Guest]: But for a human being, for most of us, stories are what move us much more than data does.
[Guest]: And so that was the, I decided at that point, it suddenly became quite clear to me the kind
[Guest]: of writing I'll do, the way I will build these stories and these arguments, how I'll pick
[Guest]: a theme about a subject that's not obvious to men, but is a lived experience of a majority
[Guest]: of women.
[Guest]: And then I'll interview women and real women's real stories I'll write.
[Guest]: And that's how I will build that argument.
[Guest]: It was not my personal opinion.
[Guest]: This is the lived experience of these many women, which by the way, if now you talk to
[Guest]: the woman sitting next to you, maybe she'll also concur.
[Guest]: So that I felt might move the needle, at least when it came to individual opinions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and the importance of storytelling is, you know, really, it's a difference that I
[Amit Varma]: keep talking about, you know, even in my writing class, or even generally, it's a difference
[Amit Varma]: between the abstract and the concrete.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, in Bill Gates's case, or in anybody's case, large numbers are abstract, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whereas actually a particular story of a particular person is concrete.
[Amit Varma]: And that has a far greater impact, your mirror neurons line up, as it were, in your head
[Amit Varma]: and much better chance of sort of empathy and kind of relating.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what do you speak about the kundi?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, kundi not being there, I remember the first person who mentioned this to me
[Amit Varma]: was I'd done an episode on Me Too around the time Me Too happened with Supriya Nair and
[Amit Varma]: Nikita Saxena.
[Amit Varma]: And Nikita, of course, was a caravan journalist who would go around the country everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And she pointed this out that men just completely sort of take it for granted.
[Amit Varma]: It's not something they would even look for.
[Amit Varma]: But for every woman, it's a real thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's part of that layer, that added layer of concern that women carry around with them,
[Amit Varma]: which men simply don't see, like I can go for a walk at midnight, or I can enter a crowded
[Amit Varma]: lift without having to look around or I can, you know, check into a hotel without caring
[Amit Varma]: about whether the kundi is there.
[Amit Varma]: But women carried these layers.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when I was going through your posts, I was kind of putting them in different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of categories.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those categories was what only women go through, you know, and these are
[Amit Varma]: all things that are part of this layer, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So in a post where you actually wrote about this kundi incident, you also quoted someone
[Amit Varma]: called Natasha, who wrote, quote, every time I enter any public space, I look at the escape
[Amit Varma]: routes.
[Amit Varma]: I first look at what in the environment I can use as a weapon in case I'm attacked.
[Amit Varma]: I'm mentally prepared all the time.
[Amit Varma]: I have told this to male friends, and men just don't understand it.
[Amit Varma]: But in our heads, we women are constantly plotting how we can use a metal water bottle
[Amit Varma]: we are carrying for self-defense, like Shruti did reference to someone else, we are mentally
[Amit Varma]: practicing how to use it in case we get attacked.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, I think if you're a man and listening to this, and you think, oh,
[Amit Varma]: these are just some women to whom bad things have happened.
[Amit Varma]: They're really not.
[Amit Varma]: It's every woman, you know, that you have to learn to think about things in a way that
[Amit Varma]: men simply don't.
[Amit Varma]: And this percolates along other fault lines, you know, it's there in caste as well.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if somebody asked me what my surname is, after I say, Hi, I'm Amit, I don't even
[Amit Varma]: think twice about it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, for someone who is, you know, not of the same caste, there is that added layer
[Amit Varma]: of hostility and weariness that kind of that you sense from the other person.
[Amit Varma]: So it's interesting just to, you know, think of the kind of life we live in India, think
[Amit Varma]: of all the different fault lines, and all the different layers that are therefore invisible
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Amit Varma]: And then get back to your narrative, you know, you've thought that you want to tell the stories
[Amit Varma]: of women to kind of make all of these connections, but you're thinking of it at that point as
[Guest]: a book.
[Guest]: So this idea was probably I carried around for two years, or maybe three years, because
[Guest]: soon after this idea came to me, I was pregnant with this idea and then pregnant with an actual
[Guest]: child.
[Guest]: So that that kind of took over.
[Guest]: And then we had our baby and then COVID happened around the same time.
[Guest]: And then some, I mean, this idea was constantly with me, I would often go back and think about
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But I was thinking about it like a book.
[Guest]: And as I mean, I'm no imposter syndrome here, genuinely, I'm a very undisciplined person,
[Guest]: because I need a deadline or something to work towards, otherwise, I don't, I don't
[Guest]: of my own volition will not sit down to do something without an answerability or a deadline
[Guest]: just programmed that way by our education system.
[Guest]: So for that reason, I think I never wrote a word about it.
[Guest]: I mean, I would talk to women and I would note down their stories on my phone in an
[Guest]: app evernote, I would write them sometimes on on the laptop and paste them there.
[Guest]: And then, but I had these disparate collection of stories over several months and years of
[Guest]: talking to women, but I hadn't actually sat sit down to, you know, start writing the book.
[Guest]: And then around somewhere, I think in September cohort, I was in in your course.
[Guest]: And so the the course was great, of course, but at the end of the course, I think the
[Guest]: conversation that I you and I had was for me the big, well, decisive moment.
[Guest]: After the course ended, I told you that, you know, I have this book idea and can we discuss
[Guest]: it and then we had a zoom call and I told you the idea.
[Guest]: And I also had a lot of concerns, I remember at that time about writing it as a privileged
[Guest]: woman, because, you know, what if people say that you're, if I don't write about women
[Guest]: who are suffering from many other and much more devastating challenges like poverty and
[Guest]: caste and all of that, if I don't write about them, then this is a first world woman problem.
[Guest]: If I write about them, then people say you're appropriating, you don't know what you're
[Guest]: writing about, which I truly don't.
[Guest]: I've had all of these concerns and questions in my mind.
[Guest]: And I remember that conversation with you was very clarifying for me, because you said,
[Guest]: you know, you write what you think about what you know about and what you feel happy, confident
[Guest]: writing and don't worry about all of this criticism.
[Guest]: I'd imagined too many layers of criticism in my mind.
[Guest]: So for me, it was quite freeing to let go of that, kya hoga toh hoga, dekhenge, but
[Guest]: for now, let me just write what I feel strongly about, like these things are my lived experiences.
[Guest]: So at least that I can, that's where I can start.
[Guest]: And it's not like there's a hierarchy of problems, right?
[Guest]: Because you have a problem, which is a quote unquote first world problem, so it's not a
[Guest]: problem anymore.
[Guest]: Like if you are not able to sleep through the night, because you're worried about your
[Guest]: safety in a place where you've paid good money to stay be and be safe, then that's a legitimate
[Guest]: real problem.
[Guest]: Even if you're not starving, and even if you're, you don't have any of the other multiple multitudes
[Guest]: of problem that women, other women suffer from, it doesn't diminish that you are still
[Guest]: facing a challenge that's unfair, and it's totally because of your gender.
[Guest]: So that was freeing.
[Guest]: And then you also, the biggest thing was that you said write it as a newsletter, which I
[Guest]: had never considered up till that point.
[Guest]: And then you said that, you know, because you're not, also not the challenge, I'd challenge
[Guest]: of not having the self-discipline to write a chapter a day or a chapter a week, just
[Guest]: put yourself, give yourself a weekly deadline, ke har hafte ek post nikalna hai.
[Guest]: And then I was like, ki yaar weekly karein, ki fortnightly karein, ho payega, ki nahin
[Guest]: ho payega.
[Guest]: And then, but then you said that, you know, you will, before you realize it, you'll have
[Guest]: a body of work behind you.
[Guest]: And then somebody who discovers you two years down the line can actually go back and click
[Guest]: into the stuff you've written along the way.
[Guest]: And that in itself is a, is an achievement to have that body of work.
[Guest]: And then later, if you want to make it a book.
[Guest]: So for me, that was a tipping point where I said, and I think even after, uske bhi do
[Guest]: teen mahine baad jaake, like today, if anyone goes and sees my first welcome post, it begins,
[Guest]: the publishing date is October 3rd or something.
[Guest]: But it came out in December.
[Guest]: It came out in December.
[Guest]: So the first thing I written is that there is a two month gap in the date on this piece
[Guest]: and the actual publishing of this piece, because I put it out and then I didn't put it out
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: I mean, I published it very locally as a private thing.
[Guest]: That's why the publishing date is two months behind.
[Guest]: So it took me two months to kind of, you know, gather the courage to do it and feel like
[Guest]: kya theek hai, there's something I could pull off.
[Guest]: And so on my birthday, 4th December in 2020, was when I kind of went public with it, ki
[Guest]: theek hai, ab main likh rahi hoon, dekha jayega.
[Guest]: And then I got like 100 subscribers on day one, and I was very shocked ki yaar, damn
[Guest]: people have actual faith in me now, I had better turn up the next Friday.
[Guest]: At that time, I used to publish on Fridays, now I publish Mondays.
[Guest]: But so that's where it started.
[Guest]: And now I have a weekly deadline to work towards, so there's really no getting around it.
[Guest]: I do have to write, which is thanks to you, I have actually built up a significant body
[Amit Varma]: of work.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's a it's an impressive body of work and really impresses me is that even though
[Amit Varma]: you took that couple of months to get down to it, once you got down to it, you were so
[Amit Varma]: regular, you know, clockwork pe aata tha, ki iska toh aana hi hai, whatever day you
[Amit Varma]: decided you changed that later, but iska toh aana hi hai, which was impressive to me, because
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't just someone sitting down and writing their own thoughts, a lot of work went into
[Amit Varma]: it in terms of research in terms of speaking to people and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your work ethic during this period and how you manage this.
[Amit Varma]: Like this is author called Mason Curry, who'd once come out with a book called Daily Rituals,
[Amit Varma]: where he spoke to writers about their work habits and their work ethics and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And he was criticized correctly that boss, it's all men, you know, men ke liye toh alag
[Amit Varma]: hai, men toh apna sab kar sakte hai and you know, there'll be clockwork creatures in the
[Amit Varma]: background providing them the food and providing them everything and kind of taking care of
[Amit Varma]: all that.
[Amit Varma]: What about women?
[Amit Varma]: And then Curry to his credit came out with a book called I think Women Artists at Work
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, I'll kind of put that up.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm curious about how you then manage to get all the writing done, given that at the
[Amit Varma]: same time, there is baby, there is house, there is family, there is, you know, everything
[Amit Varma]: else is kind of also happening.
[Amit Varma]: How do you then find that mind space, find the discipline?
[Amit Varma]: So what were the methods that you kind of what were those early weeks like when you
[Amit Varma]: were kind of finding a groove just where you can write and you can bring it out on time?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So like I said, I had these disparate stories collected in on a note taking app, which which
[Guest]: were the first body that I tapped into, okay, let's look at three or four and figure out
[Guest]: what is the most compelling one to me right now.
[Guest]: And my first post was about maternity discrimination, because I was literally a new mother at that
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: And I had just been talking to you, you know, when you become a mother, somebody, some kind
[Guest]: of woman will add you to a mom's group, and that's where you will discuss all your problems,
[Guest]: like breastfeeding, the kid has a rash, what to do, he has a fever, what to do, the kid
[Guest]: is eating, not eating, sleeping, not sleeping, all your early new mother concerns, which
[Guest]: there's always something going terribly wrong in your life that is making you question your
[Guest]: worth as a human being.
[Guest]: So that tapping into that group and community at that time can be a huge source of comfort
[Guest]: and support.
[Guest]: I don't know how moms did it before this technology was available.
[Guest]: So that became my starting point, because we would talk there also about joining back
[Guest]: work and how many moms would feel that, you know, I'm not getting the same position, the
[Guest]: same kind of projects are not coming my way, or my organization has said, some people will
[Guest]: let go also some women after becoming a mother that you can't keep up with those deadlines
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: Like people would decide on your behalf, even if you are ready to put in the work to meet
[Guest]: the deadlines and do the stressful work, which should not be imposed on people, but even
[Guest]: if you volunteer to do it, people will decide on your behalf that you no longer can.
[Guest]: So bye.
[Guest]: So in India, there is no law against maternity discrimination, that was the first piece I
[Guest]: wrote and that had only stories of two women.
[Guest]: And I kind of tried the way of, if you read that postage, first her story, then another's,
[Guest]: then another's, then another's, then another's, so they go in parallel and then later I talk
[Guest]: about how their experiences were different yet similar and blah, blah, blah, the laws
[Guest]: in US law in India.
[Guest]: Then the second one was, I think about body shaming, which another issue very close to
[Guest]: heart very personally felt.
[Guest]: And then the moment I, that one I didn't have many backup of many stories, but I just asked
[Guest]: a couple of friends and you talk to the first five women, you'll have five stories about
[Guest]: body shaming.
[Guest]: It's that universal among women.
[Guest]: So it was, so Shuruma, it was my group of friends and my direct circle.
[Guest]: But soon as womaning grew and as it became a little more popular among people, more subscribers,
[Guest]: more readers, more on these moms groups, women are talking about it.
[Guest]: Then I started getting also stories from women I didn't originally know.
[Guest]: My process was, and this is the book that you've mentioned, I've read the book, the
[Guest]: man's habit, the male artist's habit is, we'll wake up in the morning, then a breakfast,
[Guest]: then a coffee, then a stroll by the lake, then in the evening we'll write for two hours,
[Guest]: then after that drinks at the local pub, then this, then that, I mean, then walk, hiking
[Guest]: on the mountain and inspiration from all this.
[Guest]: And later you Google them, they have 14 kids, who's raising those 14 kids, right?
[Guest]: So no one is talking about that in the successful habits of these successful men.
[Guest]: So there are, and then when you actually read up, there are, some of these men were beasts,
[Guest]: they were monsters.
[Guest]: The kind of things they did to their wives, to their partners, the kind of privileges
[Guest]: they had, like, they want this type of food at this time and food is being presented in
[Guest]: front of them.
[Guest]: And she's raising kids, she's managing the household and you'll say no, no support
[Guest]: stuff because kids should get the love of their mother, all beastly things these men
[Guest]: have done.
[Guest]: And we celebrate so many of them today.
[Guest]: And you go back and you read about them.
[Guest]: So this was Leo Tolstoy, who I started, who I discovered accidentally on the internet
[Guest]: while I was writing a piece on breastfeeding.
[Guest]: And a book had come out recently about his, someone had found an account of his wife,
[Guest]: Sophia Tolstoy, and her diary or something had been made public.
[Guest]: And in that, I read about how he had these 13-14 kids, and he used to force her to breastfeed
[Guest]: all the children.
[Guest]: And at one time, she was suffering from some postpartum issue because of which she was
[Guest]: not able to.
[Guest]: And then they'll breastfeed each other's children also because they're all at the
[Guest]: same age.
[Guest]: And it was an accepted done thing.
[Guest]: So I think at that time, there was a driver's wife or some domestic help they had who also
[Guest]: had a baby the same age.
[Guest]: And so, Sophia Tolstoy wanted to ask that, request that woman to breastfeed the baby.
[Guest]: And Leo Tolstoy said, no, you will not do it and you have to do it yourself.
[Guest]: And then ultimately, I think that lady ended up feeding their child and he wrote a very
[Guest]: cruel play about his wife mocking her and called his son as the outcast or orphan or
[Guest]: something was raised by somebody else like there was a lot of toxicity there.
[Amit Varma]: I just want to make one point about Tolstoy that he was one of the great virtue signallers
[Amit Varma]: of his time.
[Amit Varma]: He used to talk a lot of spiritual stuff, he used to share knowledge, Gandhi also was
[Amit Varma]: impressed by him.
[Amit Varma]: And one thing that I consistently say today, in light of all the woke virtue signalling
[Amit Varma]: that goes on on Twitter also is that those who signal the most virtue possess the least.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Tolstoy is a classic example of that.
[Amit Varma]: But sorry, my pet rant out of the way.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, even Einstein, I recently read about him and I had written about him in that imposter
[Guest]: journal.
[Guest]: I'm going to go back and delete that man's name because now I'm upset.
[Guest]: His wife had helped him a lot in his research, apparently, in all of this relativity shit
[Guest]: that we consider him a god for.
[Guest]: He basically did not quote her, give her credit in the paper they wrote together, to which
[Guest]: research she had contributed a lot.
[Guest]: And there was, I read an article which was comparing him and Pierre Curie, who, Madame
[Guest]: Curie and her husband, they did this research together.
[Guest]: And then when he was nominated for a Nobel, he said that my wife will also get it.
[Guest]: She's been an equal partner in this research.
[Guest]: And that's why we know Marie Curie's name, right?
[Guest]: And then growing up for me as a child, that was the single one female scientist I could
[Guest]: have named.
[Guest]: And to this day, I don't know many people can name a second one.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, on Twitter, I saw this delightful tweet, which also is a great example of mansplaining
[Amit Varma]: which you've written about where this woman tweeted about how she once said that she was
[Amit Varma]: a great granddaughter of Marie Curie and the man with her said, no, no, you're pronouncing
[Amit Varma]: it wrong.
[Amit Varma]: It's Mariah Carey.
[Guest]: It's very difficult.
[Guest]: We digressed a lot.
[Guest]: I'm sorry.
[Guest]: We were talking about developing habits.
[Amit Varma]: You were talking about male writer's habits and therefore your own, right?
[Guest]: So now coming to my own, there was, it was, yeah, I had a small new baby, there was a
[Guest]: pandemic and my husband was being forced by the government to go to office, thus exposing
[Guest]: us and giving me nightmares and a lot of stress.
[Guest]: So in between all that, it was, and I had a job.
[Guest]: I used to work with the World Bank at the time.
[Guest]: Luckily, my boss was in the US, so I used to work at night.
[Guest]: So I had actually engineered it that way, at least for the day, I'm free for caregiving
[Guest]: and at night I'll do a few hours of the work and then after that, I'll do these quick calls
[Guest]: and by the way, many women I'm interviewing are also mothers.
[Guest]: So they are just as busy as I am.
[Guest]: So it was always a huge scheduling challenge.
[Guest]: So actually, not a very small percentage, but a limited percentage of the stories I've
[Guest]: written about have actually been phone conversations that I've even had with them and milna to
[Guest]: kher possible hi nahi tha during the pandemic, but even conversations have been very few.
[Guest]: Most of them have been either chats or I've asked them to send me voice notes with, I
[Guest]: send them questions and later they send voice notes as answers because I can't even expect
[Guest]: a mother to type out an answer and send me.
[Guest]: So women are busy on both sides of that relationship, the person who's interviewing and the interviewer.
[Guest]: So that was how I would pull together these stories.
[Guest]: I would decide on a theme for the week and publicly put out a call for stories that were
[Guest]: harder to find.
[Guest]: Like when I wrote about domestic violence and all, there's not a lot of women who will
[Guest]: come out on a WhatsApp group with 200 other women and say, hi, I was abused.
[Guest]: So there I would put out a call on Twitter or something so that people can privately
[Guest]: reach out to me.
[Guest]: But some of these like imposter syndrome, the kundi thing, these things women are quite
[Guest]: comfortable discussing in the open and you know, nobody really, like you said, men take
[Guest]: them for granted.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And men don't even listen to these stories.
[Guest]: So women are actually, when you are approaching it with good faith and they trust you, they
[Guest]: are quite open and I feel like women's conversations are far richer than men's conversation.
[Guest]: Men will usually gather and even with their father and brother and best friend, they'll
[Guest]: talk about sports and politics and banal stuff, which has no consequence really to your life
[Guest]: immediately.
[Guest]: But men often have very, I find, surface conversations, which is a pity because women's conversations
[Guest]: are really rich and really, I mean, they open up and they trust and they share quite freely.
[Amit Varma]: I want to double click on this because it's something I'm genuinely curious about in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that many people have told me that this year, especially my episodes with women are
[Amit Varma]: what they have found the most memorable in, you know, whether it's Shrayana or Minalji
[Amit Varma]: or Nilanjana or Urvashi or Mukulika and so on and so forth, whereas the episodes with
[Amit Varma]: men are all great, you know, they're engaging in good faith, they're, you know, sharing
[Amit Varma]: a lot of insights, but not that same level.
[Amit Varma]: And I kind of feel that there is something there that in many of these episodes where
[Amit Varma]: I've just sat and spoken to a woman for five hours, there is, you know, these people have
[Amit Varma]: left the filter, just spoken with such raw honesty, and gone really deep and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm trying to figure out why this is because what you say about conversations is also,
[Amit Varma]: of course, quite true.
[Amit Varma]: Most of the time, you know, men are kind of are talking about sports and whatever and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, like you pointed out, the conversations can stay shallow.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking aloud here, but I'd love to sort of ask you to sort of elaborate
[Amit Varma]: not just on the what of it, but also the why of it.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that happens?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that one thing that constrains that kind of deep conversation between men
[Amit Varma]: is sort of this fear of intimacy, you know, that macho thing that you know, you will never
[Amit Varma]: show your emotion, you will never show your vulnerability.
[Amit Varma]: And I think part of any honest conversation between two people is when you let that guard
[Amit Varma]: down and you're willing to show your vulnerability and you're willing to show when you're moved
[Amit Varma]: by something or when you don't know something, or you're feeling lost and confused, and you're
[Amit Varma]: willing to express that and men don't do that enough.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just thinking aloud that maybe that's one possible reason, but if you had to look
[Amit Varma]: at the why of it, what would you sort of?
[Guest]: Yeah, so it's a bit on both sides.
[Guest]: And like I always say, you know, gender issues are not a men versus women issue.
[Guest]: They are actually all of us are affected by them.
[Guest]: You're rightly saying that.
[Guest]: I think men are conditioned from an early age to, you know, hide their emotions, boys
[Guest]: don't cry, and those things.
[Guest]: So they're taught that it is weakness to show vulnerability, it is weakness to show and
[Guest]: to accept your flaws or to discuss your failings.
[Guest]: And so there is this burden, unnecessary burden in the modern age, which is put on men of
[Guest]:  men are no longer sole breadwinners in most families, in this strata at least.
[Guest]: And yet they have this burden of, I have to be the stoic supporter and carry this burden
[Guest]: all by myself.
[Guest]: They don't have to really.
[Guest]: We can all be human beings with each other at this point, at least in families where
[Guest]: there's otherwise financially secure, security is there, both are equal partners in terms
[Guest]: of who's bringing in the dough and things like that.
[Guest]: Even in relationships where the wife is a stay-at-home wife or mother.
[Guest]: Even in those relationships, I'm saying that there is equal vulnerability that can be shown
[Guest]: by both partners.
[Guest]: It's not necessary anymore, but we are still somehow teaching our boys those problematic
[Guest]: values and forcing them to hold up themselves to this unreal standard.
[Guest]: So that's definitely a problem that affects men.
[Guest]: And then I think on the women's side, there is a lot of feeling of not being heard enough
[Guest]: in your own marriages, in your own homes, by your own family.
[Guest]: So that also leads to women opening up more easily when they are given the chance.
[Guest]: Because we are taught, we are silenced right from an early age.
[Guest]: Like I said, you know, like, achi ladkiya zor se nahi hasti, achi ladkiya zyada nahi
[Guest]: bolti.
[Guest]: So these things are taught to us from a very early stage.
[Guest]: And so we have bottled up a lot.
[Guest]: And there is obviously much more disadvantage and discrimination that we are facing.
[Guest]: And we have nowhere to voice it, at least not in our immediate relationships in most
[Guest]: cases.
[Guest]: So that's another reason why women kind of open up quite freely and with each other.
[Guest]: And that is not new even, you know, I mean, even in I think my grandmom's generation,
[Guest]: I have known aunts and all having this delicious conversation, which you would just want to
[Guest]: be a fly on the wall and drink it all up ki achha yeh bhi hota tha family mein humein
[Guest]: yeh pata hi nahi tha, like stuff like that.
[Guest]: And men are talking about OLD and, sorry, what was it, ODL and all those things.
[Guest]: So there, that's what it's, it's that difference has been there forever of women's conversation
[Guest]: being more rich.
[Guest]: And it's a, it's a issue, I think, on both sides.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about how you sort of arrived at your voice for the newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things I really like about it, and I think I mentioned this at the start
[Amit Varma]: when you asked for my feedback, is one, of course, is a personal tone, which makes the
[Amit Varma]: reader relate to what you're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: But also, you've managed to find just the right balance of lightness and seriousness
[Amit Varma]: within that.
[Amit Varma]: And part of how you do this is also by using memes creatively, you see, if you've written
[Amit Varma]: a book, you won't have been able to use GIFs in it and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a danger of overdoing that.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, it's just the right light touch.
[Amit Varma]: You put it there, but you put it there in such a way that it kind of makes you smile,
[Amit Varma]: but it doesn't trivialize the subject, and then you're kind of going on with it.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you sort of arrive at this voice?
[Amit Varma]: What was your thinking behind it?
[Amit Varma]: Like how intentional was it ki mujhe yeh karna hai isliye?
[Guest]: So one thing was that humor has always been a part of my life.
[Guest]: It's when I'm growing up, my dad was a very funny guy, he used to be laughing a lot.
[Guest]: My brother is probably the funniest person I know.
[Guest]: So there was always humor as a coping mechanism, as a defense mechanism, there is a lot of
[Guest]: humor in the family, in my personality.
[Guest]: Probably not the most world-class jokes, but it is.
[Guest]: Yaar tum kaise yeh phir, humor me bhi imposter syndrome.
[Guest]: I know, it's terrible.
[Guest]: So much unlearning needed.
[Guest]: Anyway, so humor has always been a big part of my life.
[Guest]: So for me, that was also important.
[Guest]: I like it when people say that, you know, your writing made me laugh or even chuckle
[Guest]: or even smile.
[Guest]: And these are, like we've discussed, these are difficult topics, sometimes heavy topics.
[Guest]: And I also want my audience to keep wanting to come back and, you know, I've myself read
[Guest]: so many writings about gender which make you feel depressed and make you feel sad and hopeless
[Guest]: about life and you don't want to go back there.
[Guest]: There are serious issues and people have tackled them in serious voices.
[Guest]: And as a person with a taste that prefers lightness and prefers entertainment, for me,
[Guest]: I have not been able to watch a certain movie, for example, if it's very serious and very
[Guest]: stark in your face, horrible realities of life, dekho kitna dard, toh wo mere se nahi
[Guest]: hota as a consumer.
[Guest]: I am not able to consume that and I find it that it disturbs my mental balance, sanity
[Guest]: and everything.
[Guest]: So I didn't want to inflict that on my readers, even though I'm talking about difficult subjects.
[Guest]: So that was a definite choice there that it has to be funny, but again, with the right
[Guest]: balance of somehow in a way that doesn't trivialize it.
[Guest]: And then Bollywood, like I said, I'm a fan.
[Guest]: It's been a part of a constant backdrop to my life growing up.
[Guest]: So that is what came naturally to me.
[Guest]: And everyone says that, I think you also said that in your writing course, that don't look
[Guest]: for the thing that you'll be the first person to write, that duniya mein kisi ne is baare
[Guest]: mein aaj tak lika, I'll be the one who'll introduce this to humanity.
[Guest]: Aisa wait karoge toh you'll never find a chapter, any subject to write about because everything
[Guest]: has been touched upon by someone or the other.
[Guest]: But you are the only you in the world.
[Guest]: So your experiences, your lived experiences, your personality is what you bring to it.
[Guest]: So for me, it was also a conscious choice that I should write in a way that I talk to
[Guest]: a friend.
[Guest]: I should write in the way that I normally would interact with people.
[Guest]: That's bringing my personality to it.
[Guest]: And so this was the most entertaining way that I could come up with.
[Guest]: And it does evolve with time.
[Guest]: Sometimes there are very serious topics which I just cannot at all introduce any humor in.
[Guest]: Like I've written about domestic violence, miscarriages, abortions, these are not subjects
[Guest]: in which you can bring in Bollywood gifs.
[Guest]: But for the most part, other subjects, which are a part of everyday life, there is a lot
[Guest]: of satire, sarcasm, gifs, memes, and people have appreciated a lot.
[Guest]: Like my readers, when they write back to me, they say that, you know, I love the way you
[Guest]: highlight these things and I want to, and it makes me want to keep coming back for more.
[Guest]: And that's basically mission accomplished, right?
[Guest]: That a person did not feel turned off by the gruesome realities of life and wants to actually
[Guest]: read more about it.
[Guest]: And sort of like the, that's what this is.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And I just love the way you, you know, start so many posts, just by saying, hello ji, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which is sort of, so immediately one hears your voice and then, you know, it just
[Amit Varma]: kind of flows naturally.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a lot of humor in it also.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe at some point as we talk about the individual subjects, I'll quote some of it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before we get to talking about some of the subjects you've tackled, and I actually
[Amit Varma]: very deliberately want to go subject by subject and talk about a whole bunch of them, because
[Amit Varma]: I think that many of them will be eye opening for many people or something that all of them
[Amit Varma]: merit being spoken about.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I figured that to you, they might seem hey, you know, normal and the stuff
[Amit Varma]: of everyday life and what's the big deal about it, but I just feel it all bears talking about
[Amit Varma]: because what they have in common is that it is both something that is in front of us and
[Amit Varma]: yet we do not see it.
[Amit Varma]: So for that reason alone, but before we go there, one sort of final meta question in
[Amit Varma]: terms of how has the response to womaning in India been from people?
[Amit Varma]: How has the response been from women?
[Amit Varma]: And I would imagine there are two kinds of responses from men.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, tell me a little bit about these responses and, you know, how they've come
[Amit Varma]: your way, what they've meant to you.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I think we discussed this yesterday when we were talking about what we'll talk about.
[Guest]: And I said that there's a whole unseen part of womaning that we should talk about, which
[Guest]: is what is not published out there, what happens after I put out a piece.
[Guest]: And it's always like my favorite time is right after I've put a piece out because that's
[Guest]: when the responses start coming in and somebody will write a long email back to me.
[Guest]: Somebody will send me a WhatsApp message.
[Guest]: Somebody will write, retweet on Twitter with a comment of their own.
[Guest]: And often, sometimes it's even happened that, you know, I put out a piece with five stories
[Guest]: and then the most stark story has come back as feedback to me that, oh, you know, this
[Guest]: happened to me too.
[Guest]: And by the way, here's what happened.
[Guest]: And I was like, my God, this is the story which should have been the centerpiece of
[Guest]: what I wrote.
[Guest]: And so I love the feedback I get because it's often very personal.
[Guest]: It's not just that thumbs up, it's not just that, it's very, very personal.
[Guest]: It's that, you know, this happened to me in my life.
[Guest]: My mother-in-law said this, my father said that, my boss said this, my colleague did
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And people, especially women, will connect with real examples from their life.
[Guest]: And you mentioned men have two types of responses.
[Guest]: Actually, men have one type of response and women have two.
[Guest]: That was a surprise for me as well.
[Guest]: So men will, the one response I get is appreciation from men because the rest of the men will
[Guest]: ignore it.
[Guest]: It's very easy to ignore things, right, when you are living in a privileged life.
[Guest]: Like we spoke about caste.
[Guest]: Now I used to really pride myself for a long part of my life that I don't even know what
[Guest]: caste I belong to.
[Guest]: Such a matter of pride.
[Guest]: So I am such an un-castist, but then later I realized that it's a privilege that is available
[Guest]: only to upper caste people that, or forward caste people that you don't know what caste
[Guest]: you are.
[Guest]: If you are from a backward caste, you will be made aware of your caste by the world,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So just the fact that you don't know what caste you are defines, shows what caste you
[Guest]: are and it's a privilege.
[Guest]: And there's so much happening around me at all times, which has to do with caste, which
[Guest]: I don't even see because my privilege has made my life a smooth highway, why should
[Guest]: I think about the ubad khabad rast on the side, right.
[Guest]: And that's how I also think about what it must be like for men.
[Guest]: So even, like I said, the most well-meaning men, their life is so comfortable with all
[Guest]: these privileges that they don't even know they have, that there, what is the incentive?
[Guest]: Why should they worry about other people living a more difficult life?
[Guest]: Of course, yes, one incentive is that these other people are your own wife, your own mother,
[Guest]: your daughter, our mothers and sisters.
[Guest]: But other than that, if you just think about it as the comfort of privilege, it happens
[Guest]: to all of us and we are all guilty of it, all of us who have our privilege on one axis
[Guest]: or the other.
[Guest]: So men will either ignore or because they are too privileged and why should they care
[Guest]: about a woman writer or the ones who read are genuinely, they send me things like, you
[Guest]: know, this is an education, I look forward to it every week, every week you make me aware
[Guest]: of something that I never thought about, and they've been super supportive.
[Guest]: There's a friend who is a CEO running his own firm now, and he read the post I wrote
[Guest]: about lack of women friendly infrastructure in workplaces.
[Guest]: And he said, I'm installing sanitary pad vending machines in my office toilet.
[Guest]: As soon as I finished reading this post, I was like, I'm doing this right now.
[Guest]: So you know, I've had such tangible impact from my readers and male readers have been
[Guest]: nothing but kind because those who are unkind will not read.
[Guest]: Women on the other hand have had a polar opposite response.
[Guest]: So one is, of course, a vast majority of women who support it, who love it, who say that,
[Guest]: you know, it felt like you were speaking my words, this is what I always wanted to say,
[Guest]: it was like reading my own inner voice.
[Guest]: And I'm so happy you gave voice to this particular thing, because this really bothered me and
[Guest]: like I said, a lot of personal stories and very rich love that I get from them.
[Guest]: And then there are women who are offended, like violently offended by it.
[Guest]: I've had women shout at me on the phone, that tum kar kya rahe ho, tum kya likhna chahate
[Guest]: ho, kya kar rahi ho tum, you are corrupting the minds of people.
[Guest]: And I've had women like shout at me and I've had visceral violent responses to womaning.
[Guest]: And I've always wondered that, you know, going in even I thought like you said just now that
[Guest]: men might hate it, but most women will like it.
[Guest]: And then when I thought about it deeper, I thought, you know, these are often women who
[Guest]: have lived for years and decades in that restricted lifestyle and in that prison of gender roles,
[Guest]: ki main aurat ho mera kaam hai, Diwali ke din khade hoke sab ke liye pakode dalna or
[Guest]: whatever.
[Guest]: The XYZ gender role has been a part of their identity for so many decades and they've lived
[Guest]: it for so many decades that now if you question it, it makes them feel like I lived my life
[Guest]: wrong or I could have lived it better or, you know, this piece of writing is highlighting
[Guest]: something that has gone terribly wrong with my life and I don't want to pull on that thread.
[Guest]: So that's why women often have a very visceral response.
[Guest]: So my strongest, harshest critics have been women, not men.
[Amit Varma]: That's very strange.
[Amit Varma]: So like, how do they get in touch with you?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you mentioned that someone shouted at you on the phone, matlab ye interaction
[Amit Varma]: shuru kaha se hoti hai?
[Amit Varma]: Do they kind of cold call you or just connect with you or the blue just to tell you that
[Amit Varma]: they hated it so much?
[Guest]: No, so the cold hatred comes from via email or something.
[Guest]: Sometimes angry mails will come.
[Guest]: But ye phone call wala shouting happened because I was actually talking to a lady about some
[Guest]: other story and then she said she was in her late 50s or 60s, early 60s.
[Guest]: And she said that, you know, one issue that nobody talks about is late age care and how
[Guest]: women are made responsible for caregiving for their in-laws, but not their parents.
[Guest]: So at a very senior age, when a person is bedridden, has to be cleaned, has to be bathed,
[Guest]: you have to do like very, very intimate care for that person.
[Guest]: At that age, it will not be the son who will be asked to do that, it will be the daughter-in-law.
[Guest]: Even though, if you think about it, our parents have cleaned our poop when we were kids, we
[Guest]: should be the ones doing it for them when we grow up.
[Guest]: But no, the men will not be asked to do it, their wives will be asked to do it.
[Guest]: And conversely, the wives are not often allowed to do it for their own parents, because wahan
[Guest]: ki bahu karegi wo kaam.
[Guest]: Right, so this was a subject I hadn't thought of because stage of life, I have not reached
[Guest]: that stage of life where you're caregiving for your parents.
[Guest]: But I was like, oh wow, this is insightful, I've never thought of this, but I don't have
[Guest]: enough friends in that age group either who are at that stage of life.
[Guest]: So can you introduce me to some people who, some more women who will tell me more stories
[Guest]: about this and I'll build a piece around it.
[Guest]: So then she gave me numbers of some women and she said so and so is doing for her in-law,
[Guest]: so and so has her own mother is in an old age home, but she's doing it for her father-in-law,
[Guest]: something like that.
[Guest]: So she gave me a couple of numbers and one of the numbers I called and that lady thought
[Guest]: that somehow there was a miscommunication.
[Guest]: She thought I'm calling to write a very positive story about what a great daughter-in-law she
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: But when I asked her, I said, do you not feel ki aapko apni mother ko caregiving karne ka
[Guest]: bhi haq hai, ya should your husband be the one contributing towards caregiving for your
[Guest]: in-laws, at least contributing, if not doing it himself.
[Guest]: There's no shame in caring for your parents-in-law, but why only one gender?
[Guest]: So then I think the line of questioning was something I assumed she was expecting because
[Guest]: there was an interlocutor between us who had told me that this person is at the same stage
[Guest]: of life.
[Guest]: But I suppose there was a miscommunication.
[Guest]: So she did not at all agree with the point of view that I was coming to it with.
[Guest]: So she was like, you have an agenda against women and against culture and society and
[Guest]: so she scolded me a lot on the phone, so I said, sorry ma'am, you had a miscommunication,
[Guest]: it's okay, I'm sorry, I hurt your feelings, I think we'll drop it here.
[Guest]: Then I cut the call and then she sent me a lot of abuses on WhatsApp and a lot of other
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: I mean, see, that's what I'm talking about, you don't, there are threads that people don't
[Guest]: want you to pull at in their life.
[Guest]: It's like the boss who got upset with me because I quit the service because he's in the service,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So that is a criticism.
[Guest]: It's a statement I'm making on his life choices.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I remember once I'd written this column about how it is immoral to have children,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Partly meant to be provocative, but the argument, of course, is flawless.
[Amit Varma]: The argument basically being that you should not do something to people without their consent
[Amit Varma]: and it is wrong to cause people pain or to kill them.
[Amit Varma]: And basically, when you're having kids, you are guaranteeing that they will feel pain
[Amit Varma]: and they will die and there is no way of taking their consent and therefore it's wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So that was my provocative argument.
[Amit Varma]: And I've never got trolled by anyone like I've been trolled by the right, I've been
[Amit Varma]: trolled by the left, I've been trolled by Shahrukh Khan fans, I've been trolled on religious
[Amit Varma]: grounds.
[Amit Varma]: No one has told me like parents suddenly came out and trolled me.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I was just thinking that, hey, you know, why are you taking it so personally, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people make choices.
[Amit Varma]: And which is also, by the way, something that you've kind of written about elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll kind of come to that.
[Amit Varma]: So like, I was sort of looking at all your posts, and they seem to be fitting in a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of broad categories, like, you know, women having to conform to stereotypes, women living
[Amit Varma]: in a world designed for men, violence and women, you know, what only women go through,
[Amit Varma]: women hobbling themselves, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned that the way that you prefer to think about them is what women go through
[Amit Varma]: in offices, what women go through in public spaces, what women go through at home.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, which of these categories should we sort of start talking about and addressing?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the fourth is your own image, self image, your own self image and your interior.
[Guest]: We also like imposter syndrome is the best example, right?
[Guest]: The way we think about ourselves is also colored by gender.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's start with workplace.
[Amit Varma]: You have a great post, which asks the question, can women even do jobs?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so tell me a little bit about the stereotypes that kind of apply here, about
[Amit Varma]: the kind of jobs that women can do or can't do.
[Amit Varma]: And once they do have a job, what they are expected to, you know, what is their role,
[Guest]: what their role typically becomes within offices?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So what kind of jobs women have, we have the same kind of jobs that men do, right?
[Guest]: But there is a well documented phenomena called the brilliance bias, which is that when I
[Guest]: ask you to think of 10 brilliant people, you will probably name 9 men.
[Guest]: And most people will name 10 men.
[Guest]: Because we think that brilliance is a very male trait.
[Guest]: And for reasons that we've discussed before, like nobody knows the name of Einstein's wife.
[Guest]: She's as brilliant as he was.
[Guest]: But brilliance bias, we think that Einstein is the, history has also taught us that Einstein
[Guest]: was, the history is paved by great big men, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, there is an assumption when a man does a job that he is competent to do
[Guest]: that job, fair or unfair.
[Guest]: And there is, but when a woman is in the same position, and has come to it through the same
[Guest]: channel, by the way, having overcome many hurdles, which are unseen, she's constantly
[Guest]: expected to prove her competence to do that job.
[Guest]: So this happens, especially in STEM, where brilliance bias is the most in science, technology
[Guest]: engineering, mathematics, where it's a male dominated field.
[Guest]: And over and over women are asked, can you do this?
[Guest]: Are you able to do this?
[Guest]: I've spoken to women who are senior data scientists in big companies, Google and all and who've
[Guest]: had youngsters come up to them and explain what is HTTP.
[Guest]: Young men will come and say like, aapko toh bata nahi hoga, main bata deta ho, like that.
[Guest]: So it's not even, it's a cross hierarchy, like it's not even that you will respect a
[Guest]: person because they're more senior to you.
[Guest]: Because she's a woman, you'll assume that she doesn't know what she's doing, or she's
[Guest]: here because of some other reasons, not because of her competence.
[Guest]: So that's a pain point that women have, in many different aspects of their jobs, reiterated
[Guest]: that it's assumed that I don't know how to do my job.
[Guest]: And this plays out in many ways.
[Guest]: So one very interesting thing that a woman told me, which I'm yet to write about is failure,
[Guest]: the permission to fail.
[Guest]: Men have the permission to fail over and over again, and will be given many more chances
[Guest]: to fail than a woman.
[Guest]: If as a woman you fail once, immediately you'll be labeled ke, because iska bacha isliye ye
[Guest]: fail hui, because iski shaadi hone waliye isliye ye fail hui, because she's single isliye ye
[Guest]: fail hui, koi bhi cheez ho jayegi.
[Guest]: And somehow it'll be, that failure will become your, will be associated with you for life.
[Guest]: So women don't have that much scope to fail.
[Guest]: Women also don't have access to mentors at work for this reason, because either male
[Guest]: mentors are creepy themselves, or there is an assumption that there's something creepy
[Guest]: going on between a male mentor and female mentee.
[Guest]: Even if it's completely harmless between them, people will perceive it in a very different
[Guest]: way than that relationship between two men.
[Guest]: What you spoke about, what kind of jobs they end up doing.
[Guest]: So that's a post I wrote about, are you the office mom?
[Guest]: So this has happened to me, it has happened to many women, that lunch ka time hai to,
[Guest]: arey, Mahima ko do na menu, she will order.
[Guest]: Women are better at this, or, achha, so and so, wo hai, kuch organize karna hai, get together,
[Guest]: ya outing, chalo, Mahima aap karo na, ladies are better at this creative stuff, aap log
[Guest]: creative hote ho.
[Guest]: So it'll be wrapped up in a compliment, but it is ultimately that this is not a job good
[Guest]: enough for us to do.
[Guest]: So you be the office mom.
[Guest]: And so women are often taking notes at meetings, women will be the one running a PPT, down
[Guest]: down down button press karne ka gaam maine bhi bahut ki hai, PMO ba jaa ke bhi ki hai,
[Guest]: Prime Minister exam le bhi peeche baith ke down button press ki hai.
[Guest]: So like, this is often the task for which women are chosen, we make good secretaries
[Guest]: according to, and you can be at any level of seniority or professional achievement,
[Guest]: these tasks will come to women.
[Guest]: Another is being heard in meetings.
[Guest]: So another thing that has also personally happened to me, and I've written a post about
[Guest]: it, that people, and not just men, people suffer from selective deafness.
[Guest]: So the chair of a meeting, whether it is a man or a woman, will give more weightage and
[Guest]: attention to a man speaking than he or she does to a woman speaking.
[Guest]: So it's happened to me that I've been talking and somebody will interrupt me suddenly and
[Guest]: talk over me and the entire room's attention shifts to that person very seamlessly as if
[Guest]: I, and makes me question, was I even talking, did I imagine that I was talking.
[Guest]: People have repeated what I've said, sometimes with a little creativity and they are given
[Guest]: credit for the idea that I had proposed.
[Guest]: I had a colleague to whom I actually had a conversation with, he was a nice guy, but
[Guest]: he used to interrupt me a lot and talk over me.
[Guest]: So because he was a nice guy, I thought, let me try having a rational conversation.
[Guest]: So outside the meeting room, once I told him that, listen, you know, you do this.
[Guest]: And he was like, no, I don't do this, what are you talking about, very full denial.
[Guest]: And then next time I was talking in a meeting and he did this.
[Guest]: And then I just looked at him and I gave him a smile.
[Guest]: And the horror that descended on his face, because then he realized that, oh my God,
[Guest]: I was actually doing this to her.
[Guest]: And people are doing it unconsciously, like by now we are conditioned to tune out a female
[Guest]: sound meter, that there is some nonsense going on with the female pitch, there is something
[Guest]: important going on with the male pitch.
[Guest]: This is programmed in us, we are conditioned to accept this, both men and women.
[Guest]: So it's all these ways in which it plays out, these biases about women's incompetence.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm going to quote you a little bit, where, you know, in one of your posts, you've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about, you know, how men are so much more assertive and how women are not even
[Amit Varma]: allowed to be assertive, in the sense that you write, quote, men negotiate their roles
[Amit Varma]: all the time.
[Amit Varma]: Such men are called driven and focused and go getters.
[Amit Varma]: But I personally experienced what happens when a woman tries the same.
[Amit Varma]: You are either too meek or too aggressive.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know any woman who has managed to hit that mythical sweet spot between the two.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later on in your post about selective deafness in meetings, you know, you give the
[Amit Varma]: moral of the story as, quote, a woman who is quiet is incompetent.
[Amit Varma]: A woman who speaks up is a fearsome terror.
[Amit Varma]: There is no middle ground available.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you also quoted someone called Pallavi, who is giving her suggestion for how to deal
[Amit Varma]: with this.
[Amit Varma]: And her suggestion is that whenever you have a suggestion, frame it as a question.
[Amit Varma]: So she says, quote, I started phrasing my opinions as questions to get heard.
[Amit Varma]: I would intentionally sound stupid to make my point.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if I found a big gap in their balance sheet or profit and loss statement,
[Amit Varma]: instead of saying that is wrong, I would say, why do we put it that way?
[Amit Varma]: And in the process of answering my stupid question, they would realize their mistake
[Amit Varma]: and figure out what they needed to do to correct it.
[Amit Varma]: Six months of this led to them making enormous changes, putting me in charge of reviews and
[Amit Varma]: making sure I was part of every boardroom meeting.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And at least she got her due in terms of, you know, her critical thinking recognized
[Amit Varma]: and being part of every boardroom meeting.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, you know, we've spoken about that added layer, which comes in when women
[Amit Varma]: are experiencing the world.
[Amit Varma]: But is there also an added layer, which women have to use when they are deciding how to
[Amit Varma]: interact with the world?
[Amit Varma]: For example, if I am saying something to anybody in a meeting or with a friend or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: I won't have to think about how will this go down?
[Amit Varma]: How will I be perceived?
[Amit Varma]: Will I be perceived as too forward or too demanding or whatever?
[Amit Varma]: I don't need to think like that, I'll just say it.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a layer also that women always have with them that you have to actually think
[Amit Varma]: about how your words will be perceived, not just what you are saying?
[Guest]: 100%, 200%.
[Guest]: I mean, I think I spend more time thinking about how I'll be perceived than the content
[Guest]: of what I have to say.
[Guest]: I'm usually quite clear on what my opinion is on things.
[Guest]: But the packaging is where most of my energy goes.
[Guest]: And that's true of most women.
[Guest]: Like you gave the example of Pallavi, yeah, I mean, it's a success story in one way, but
[Guest]: to me, it's also extremely unfortunate that somebody has to package their intelligent
[Amit Varma]: points as stupid questions in order to be heard.
[Amit Varma]: Because so much energy goes in this shit, you know, she could be doing something more
[Amit Varma]: productive for her.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I mean, I used to compare at one point, again, when this penny dropped, that
[Guest]: is the expression.
[Guest]: So when this penny drop for me was a moment when I suddenly realized that me and I had
[Guest]: a male colleague, we were used to work at the same level.
[Guest]: And I realized the kind of emails we write are so different, like, so suppose you are
[Guest]: my colleague, and you have to say a meeting is postponed, you will write, dear so and
[Guest]: so this meeting is postponed to 5.30pm, best Amit.
[Guest]: That's the kind of email that my colleague used to write, I would write, dear sir, due
[Guest]: to some unfortunate and unforeseen circumstances and technical issues we are facing, I apologize
[Guest]: that this meeting has been postponed.
[Guest]: It is now going to be scheduled at this time.
[Guest]: I will keep you updated if there's a change.
[Guest]: I apologize once again for the inconvenience.
[Guest]: Warm regards, I always use warm because you have to, just regards also, rude, warm regards.
[Guest]: So that's how I write emails and it's such a waste of my time and effort and energy and
[Guest]: creative writing for such a simple message.
[Guest]: And I would see his messages and I'd be like, dear, if I write such an email, I'll become
[Guest]: famous within one week that this person writes rude emails.
[Guest]: And this again has been shown, social experiments have been done.
[Guest]: There have been people, I think there was an experiment where a woman wrote some emails
[Guest]: as a man or a man wrote emails as a woman and they were perceived very differently and
[Guest]: they were shocked by how a person who's perceived to be a woman, people take offense much quicker
[Guest]: and will try to talk down to them, explain simple things to them like they're dumb.
[Guest]: And when you perceive it's a man, suddenly the respect goes up.
[Guest]: So these are all well-documented phenomena that we all experience and it's a huge waste
[Guest]: of our time, effort, energy, but I have to do it in order to be seen as someone worthy
[Guest]: of being listened to by people.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the phenomenon you've pointed out in meetings that women are always getting interrupted.
[Amit Varma]: It's like you said, nothing at all, you'll say X and then some guy will say X and he'll
[Amit Varma]: get the talis for it.
[Amit Varma]: And I've noticed this even in panel discussions, like the next time you're on YouTube and you're
[Amit Varma]: watching some panel discussion and there's a male moderator, just keep an eye on who
[Amit Varma]: he's interrupting and how much.
[Amit Varma]: And some people will of course interrupt everybody, but in general, women get just interrupted
[Guest]: so much more.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, I have that lens.
[Guest]: So I do see that.
[Guest]: First of all, most panels are mannels because there'll be only men.
[Guest]: And when there is one lone woman, she'll definitely get the least airtime on the panel, irrespective
[Guest]: of how senior or how much of an expert she is in that subject matter.
[Guest]: The least airtime on the panel will go to the woman because everyone is always talking
[Guest]: over her and interrupting her.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me also about physical spaces, because to me, one of the best metaphors for how we
[Amit Varma]: live in a world designed by men for men is air conditioning.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also written a post about it.
[Amit Varma]: I'd written about it three or four years ago, I think when Me Too happened.
[Amit Varma]: You know how air conditioning was designed in the 1950s and 60s, when all offices were
[Amit Varma]: occupied mostly by men.
[Amit Varma]: And so it kept the male body temperature into account and that too, assuming that men are
[Amit Varma]: wearing suits or 21 degrees was like the default.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the truth is that it's too cold for women.
[Amit Varma]: Women feel cold at 21.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they need something warmer.
[Amit Varma]: And yet the default is that, you know, every office today will be too cold for women because
[Amit Varma]: it's set at that, quote unquote, male temperature.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, one thing that you point out is very common for women to have is that they'll
[Amit Varma]: have something called an office sweater, office sweater, office shawl, because they know that
[Amit Varma]: there's no way out.
[Amit Varma]: They've got to kind of deal with that.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also pointed out that this is also true when it comes to having women's toilets
[Amit Varma]: and not just to say in Bihar, where you know, where you point out this particular place
[Amit Varma]: where there were seven women in an office of 300.
[Amit Varma]: But even in Kerala, where there were 100 women out of a staff of 300.
[Amit Varma]: And even there, there's one lady's toilet as compared to eight or 10 ladies toilets.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also pointed out this another example, which another of the people who spoke to you
[Amit Varma]: gave that she was in this place where, you know, there were enough women, but there were
[Amit Varma]: only two toilets on the floor.
[Amit Varma]: It was an office in a five star hotel and they were both gents toilets.
[Amit Varma]: So she spoke to her boss and her boss said, okay, it's fair enough, ladies do it.
[Amit Varma]: And one people spread a rumour that she was having an affair with the boss, because why
[Amit Varma]: else would he agree to this?
[Amit Varma]: And two, these guys would slink in after office hours, and they would pee all over the women's
[Amit Varma]: toilet because they were just so angry.
[Amit Varma]: And so these are really two separate questions.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that just in terms of workplaces, do you see a growing awareness or are women
[Amit Varma]: just saying that this is not a fight worth fighting, we'll just satisfy sweet, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in your post on pregnancy, you wrote about, you know, to punish a woman for being pregnant,
[Amit Varma]: she was actually put on a floor because they want to make life uncomfortable for her because
[Amit Varma]: she leaves.
[Amit Varma]: So, in workplaces, do you see the general attitude of the women being that we'll manage,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and you carry that layer where whenever you enter a place, you're quickly eyeing out
[Amit Varma]: where is the nearest toilet when you need it?
[Amit Varma]: And that's one question, and the second one is, what is with this male anger?
[Amit Varma]: You know, that story, I found it so disturbing, that people are going after office hours,
[Amit Varma]: and they're peeing all over the women's toilet because they're upset that women have a toilet.
[Guest]: I know, right?
[Guest]: It's like monkeys flinging feces at each other.
[Amit Varma]: Kindly tell me about this.
[Guest]: What is this monkeys?
[Guest]: Monkeys, when they're angry, they shoot in their hands and flee and they'll fling feces
[Guest]: at each other.
[Amit Varma]: And they're angry.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that is?
[Guest]: That is a primal instinct, which these men are also following.
[Unknown]: Let's pee all over the toilet that we don't like.
[Unknown]: Hmm.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: A, how do women cope and B, why are men so angry?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, which is why I thought when I asked you that question earlier about the
[Amit Varma]: reactions to womaning, I thought men will have two kinds, one will be angry, as you're
[Amit Varma]: pointing out that angry kind probably doesn't read or perhaps even can't read, you know,
[Amit Varma]: but in general, there is this anger.
[Guest]: So yeah, 100%.
[Guest]: So first part is about women.
[Guest]: How do they cope?
[Guest]: I think most women suffer in silence.
[Guest]: That is the majority reaction.
[Guest]: Very few women are like me who will make a nuisance of themselves and the lady in my
[Guest]: story who went and told, at least had the guts to go and talk to the boss about it.
[Guest]: So first of all, most senior professionals are male, glass ceiling.
[Guest]: So upar se koi soch hi nahi raha hain issues ki baare mein because they are men.
[Guest]: They are incapable of thinking about these things because who has the time to apna profit
[Guest]: loss yeh sab cheeze sochna hai, market share sochna hai, sab ke beech mein who's going
[Guest]: to sit and think about do my employees have enough women toilets and what are the facilities
[Guest]: in these toilets.
[Guest]: No one has time to think about it.
[Guest]: So mostly the bosses are men and so they don't have even, it's a complete blind spot for
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And most women who are working at these lower level positions don't have the voice or the
[Guest]: agency or the courage to talk about it, you know.
[Guest]: The word toilet is not something that women will use very freely around men anyway because
[Guest]: of all the cultural filters that we have.
[Guest]: Like I am the only person here probably who's talking this much about toilet.
[Guest]: You used the word tatti on my show which I think is a first.
[Guest]: Thank you for that.
[Guest]: It's a first, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that's what.
[Guest]: So I mean, this is very shocking for most people.
[Guest]: So cultured society mein yeh baatein nahi hoti hain and therefore cultured society
[Guest]: mein women are not able to voice these demands or expectations.
[Guest]: And women are also in our own way conditioned to accept this as the lot of life, not question
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Hai to hai, jaana hai, upar to jaana hai toilet ke liye, door jaana hai to jaana hai, poori
[Guest]: building mein 100 aartein par toilets 1 is to 10 ka ratio hai to, theek hai, karenge
[Guest]: sab ussi mein adjust, line laga ke.
[Guest]: This is how women, I think for the vast majority of women cope like this because often they
[Guest]: are working at a junior level compared to men and culturally they have been trained
[Guest]: to be quiet.
[Guest]: So most women suffer in silence.
[Guest]: Why is there anger in men?
[Guest]: I think womaning would also make more men angry if it had a tangible impact on their
[Guest]: life, right?
[Guest]: So I don't think a newsletter passively sitting on the internet is really making any tangible
[Guest]: difference to their life, but if it did, then they would be angry too.
[Guest]: I know a friend of mine who's been an active supporter and she's, many of these stories,
[Guest]: like all the names are changed by the way, the names you are taking are not the real
[Guest]: names of the women.
[Guest]: So you've already spoken one or two of her stories.
[Guest]: So she has been an active supporter and she reads it regularly and she shows it to her
[Guest]: husband also sometimes that yeh meri kahaani hai kabhi kabhi when it's a professional
[Guest]: story, personal nahi batati hai.
[Guest]: But so recently she was telling me that she was having a fight with her husband about
[Guest]: some gender roles in the house that she was constantly caregiving for both children and
[Guest]: she had a trip opportunity coming up and for foreign something travel and he said, no,
[Guest]: you're not going.
[Guest]: Who's going to take care of the kids and all?
[Guest]: And they had like a serious fight about it.
[Guest]: And at one point he said ki yeh sab tum yeh womaning pad ke seekh rahi ho na.
[Guest]: So for me it was a matter of great pride that it is, a man is seeing this as something that
[Guest]: empowered a woman enough to question the inhuman conditions he is enforcing on his wife.
[Guest]: But also that is the only place where it had, as soon as it started having a real impact
[Guest]: on his real life, that's when he got upset with it and violently upset with it.
[Guest]: Anything that actually will take away some of your male privilege will hurt you.
[Guest]: That is a point where, and again, people seeing this as a zero-sum game, right, like here
[Guest]: it is a zero-sum game.
[Guest]: There are only two toilets.
[Guest]: Toh agar ek toilet ladies ban gaya, toh mera ek toilet kam ho gaya as a man.
[Guest]: Toh I am angry, ke unko kyun de diye aur toh ko utha ke mera toilet.
[Guest]: Toh therefore, not seeing it as a larger thing where women have been suffering for so many
[Guest]: years, I am the one who was occupying their rightful toilet and now it's only going back
[Guest]: to the person who it truly belonged to.
[Guest]: That's not how they'll see it.
[Guest]: They'll see it as, I've for the last five years been peeing in this toilet, suddenly
[Guest]: who are you to tell me I can't anymore?
[Guest]: So let me fling some feces at you.
[Amit Varma]: I love that line, unko kyun de diya mera toilet utha ke, which is quote of the episode.
[Amit Varma]: What you also kind of point out is how, and this is again something men will kind of miss
[Amit Varma]: or just take for granted, how there's a boys club in every office and it stops women from
[Amit Varma]: kind of getting ahead, like there was a 2020 Harvard study you've cited, which says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: over a four year period, male employees assigned a male manager were promoted faster than their
[Amit Varma]: female counterparts with no observable difference in performance.
[Amit Varma]: Women in turn were promoted at the same rate, whether assigned to a male manager or female
[Amit Varma]: manager, male employees benefited from the higher rates of social interactions with their
[Amit Varma]: male managers, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this might mean, you know, after work, you're going out for a drink with your male
[Amit Varma]: colleagues, which women sometimes can't do, because hey, they got to get back home, there's
[Amit Varma]: food to cook, all that other stuff is happening, or they may not even want to, you know, it
[Amit Varma]: can just manifest in working late in office, where the woman will be like, the men will
[Amit Varma]: stay till nine, 10 o'clock.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I think one of the people you spoke to commented on the actually the same
[Amit Varma]: amount of work is getting done, men are just stretching it out.
[Amit Varma]: It's like Parkinson's law, right?
[Amit Varma]: Work expands to fill the time available, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember in my old office, there used to be a pool table, so we used to work late,
[Amit Varma]: we used to play pool all night, but it's like, you know, and that obviously leads to a bonding
[Amit Varma]: among all the people who are there and all that shit is happening.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one look at this?
[Amit Varma]: Because then what happens here, in a sense, is that all the men have the potential to
[Amit Varma]: form this closely knit community of people who are doing all of these things together.
[Amit Varma]: And all the women individually are kind of outside of this, right?
[Amit Varma]: How does that pervert workplaces?
[Amit Varma]: And how are there ways out of it?
[Amit Varma]: Because these are all individual choices, you know, I can well, you know, if you ask
[Amit Varma]: a guy, he'll say that, listen, I'll go out drinking with whoever I choose, right?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what can I do?
[Amit Varma]: No one is stopping her from coming.
[Amit Varma]: So these are all individual choices.
[Amit Varma]: And yet collectively, there's a massive problem for everybody.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what are what are sort of your thoughts?
[Guest]: Yeah, so you've summarized the problem perfectly that it is a close knit boys club, and men,
[Guest]: given that incentives are aligned to it, that by staying late at office or going out for
[Guest]: drinks after work, I am getting that exclusive access to my boss and I am able to be party
[Guest]: to big decisions being taken, where after hours when women have all gone home.
[Guest]: So why shouldn't I capitalize on that?
[Guest]: So I again, this is, you know, we talked about how earlier, you have a problem with government
[Guest]: system, but not the people in that system.
[Guest]: So same here, I have a problem with the system, not the men and women in it.
[Guest]: Because like you said, these are individual choices that they are making based on their
[Guest]: life conditions.
[Guest]: And we can't say that toilets will be made when the caste system ends.
[Guest]: So we can't say that first end gender discrimination, then we'll do something about the boys club.
[Guest]: So we can't say that let the women first become equal partners to their husband and let their
[Guest]: husbands take care of their children.
[Guest]: So the woman can come here and have a drink with us as colleagues.
[Guest]: That's not going to happen anytime soon.
[Guest]: So I think the simpler solution, and that's why I started with workplaces because it has
[Guest]: a little more simpler solutions, simpler problems to solve, this is on the boss basically.
[Guest]: If you are taking important decisions about strategies and professional decisions are
[Guest]: being made outside the office hours or the office space on a sutta break or over drinks
[Guest]: later or over the pool table.
[Guest]: If professional decisions are being taken in these settings, then that is a toxic workplace
[Guest]: for a woman to be in.
[Guest]: Because you are telling, you're creating a system where an employee has no choice but
[Guest]: to stay after hours.
[Guest]: And that could even be a man.
[Guest]: It could be a man who says, I do want to go back home to my kids or even to watch TV after
[Guest]: hours and I don't want to sit here up beyond 6pm or beyond working hours.
[Guest]: So you have created an incentive system where people are forced to make these choices.
[Guest]: So men and women, they're all reacting to the best of their own respective limitations
[Guest]: and circumstances.
[Guest]: But the simple solution to this is that bosses need to reflect on this and see that are we
[Guest]: really giving an undue advantage to a colleague who's able to go to stay longer or hang out
[Guest]: after hours.
[Guest]: There is up to a certain limit, it is team building beyond which it is a boys club.
[Guest]: So you know, things like meet on a meeting after hours ki jaga, why not meet on a, dedicate
[Guest]: an afternoon and invite families, let people bring their kids and their spouses.
[Guest]: It's a much more wholesome environment where women can also participate and you can do
[Guest]: team building in a more healthier environment, more equitable environment.
[Guest]: So there are small steps like this, many of which I've mentioned in the post also.
[Guest]: But it's right now, at least at the workplace, these biases are relatively easier sorted
[Guest]: out, but it needs that amount of reflection from the CEOs, organizations, bosses.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and the key point is that it's actually in the self interest of the bosses and the
[Amit Varma]: CEOs to take this into account.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I keep referring to this study, which I discovered through Philip Tetlock's book
[Amit Varma]: Super Forecasting, where he points out that when a group is making a decision, the most
[Amit Varma]: important factor in the quality of the decision is not the education or the intelligence of
[Amit Varma]: the people involved, it is a diversity.
[Amit Varma]: The more diverse a group you get, you will get better decisions, which when you think
[Amit Varma]: about it is so obvious that it even seems banal, that obviously, you have different
[Amit Varma]: viewpoints colliding, you're more likely to reach a good decision.
[Amit Varma]: So it is therefore, in the interest of bosses to build diverse workplaces.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there was a study in the US a while back a few years ago, which also showed
[Amit Varma]: that companies which discriminate do worse in the market.
[Amit Varma]: So purely from a position of self interest, you want a diverse workplace.
[Amit Varma]: And in this particular context, that means involving the women as deeply in decision
[Amit Varma]: making as the men are involved.
[Amit Varma]: And a boys club really gets in the way of that, because then you're kind of shutting
[Amit Varma]: the women out.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, how you get to those solutions becomes something, you know, it's complicated,
[Amit Varma]: as you've pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: Another point that you mentioned in the context of offices is the different ways in which
[Amit Varma]: we treat maternity and paternity.
[Amit Varma]: Maternitically, it's understood that even if it's fought, but it's understood that women
[Amit Varma]: need to go, they need to spend time with the kids and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But paternity leave, even when it is there on the rolls, you know, men are frowned upon,
[Amit Varma]: if they actually take it.
[Amit Varma]: I think you quoted someone who mentioned that people in his office when he took paternity
[Amit Varma]: leave, they told him, quote, you will understand at the time of appraisal that you shouldn't
[Amit Varma]: have taken it.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: The expectation being, okay, there's a baby on Sunday, but you come to the office on Wednesday,
[Amit Varma]: people will congratulate you, and then you go to the meeting, because there's someone
[Guest]: at home who's taking care of it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry.
[Amit Varma]: My, this is not.
[Amit Varma]: It's a Bengali thing.
[Guest]: It's a Bengali thing.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I blame my half Bengali thing for this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, tell me a little bit about this, because, you know, there are many men who now take
[Amit Varma]: fatherhood seriously, hopefully, and who, who want to participate, you know, like one
[Amit Varma]: of the men you interviewed, who said, I wanted to be with my child, that is reason enough,
[Amit Varma]: you know, but, you know, how are attitudes towards this evolving?
[Amit Varma]: And if it does hurt careers, if your bosses are going to feel that, hey, this guy is not
[Amit Varma]: committed enough, you know, why is he going back home wife to her?
[Amit Varma]: So does it then create a disincentive towards that kind of caring parenthood, if your office
[Amit Varma]: environment is kind of like this?
[Amit Varma]: And does one see, does one see a drift towards change?
[Amit Varma]: And this is perhaps a separate question, so you can take it after this.
[Amit Varma]: But in the office context, does one see a drift towards change?
[Amit Varma]: You know, in a longer term thing, even if it's slow, you know, is a change happening?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, before I talk about the professional side of what men face at the workplace, I want
[Guest]: to also underscore the importance of paternity leave on the personal front.
[Guest]: So, yes, India is has a very progressive maternity leave policy, six months compulsory leave,
[Guest]: which is by global standards, one of the best.
[Guest]: So we've done well on that front, at least we are giving women the time to recuperate
[Guest]: after childbirth and get into...
[Amit Varma]: I'll actually interject and point out that as Pragati Editor, I'd commissioned a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of pieces on this, Devika Kher, Suman Joshi, a bunch of different people had written pieces
[Amit Varma]: and the maternity law that we have in India has actually hurt women more than helped them
[Amit Varma]: as a lot of well intentioned laws do, in the sense that women's employment has certainly
[Amit Varma]: gone down because of it.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something we predicted before it happened, because you're changing the incentives.
[Amit Varma]: So the intentions were great, the outcomes have been bad, and I still feel that while
[Amit Varma]: it's a problem you absolutely have to address, a law is such a blunt weapon and can backfire
[Amit Varma]: so spectacularly, as seems to have happened in this case, but I'm sorry, carry on.
[Guest]: Yeah, no.
[Guest]: So the solution I want to propose also addresses that problem.
[Guest]: And I agree with you that the law has been very blunt.
[Guest]: But also, I mean, if we think of it as a baby steps evolution, so first thing, at least
[Guest]: give women time to recuperate and at least six months of breastfeeding for the infant
[Guest]: is good and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So for all these reasons, good, you gave women time to sit at home and bond with the babies.
[Guest]: But I also think that that is exactly where lies the genesis of gender roles in a marriage
[Guest]: and therefore later in a household.
[Guest]: And honestly, if you had to tell me that Mahima, you can change one thing in the world, I would
[Guest]: say change this.
[Guest]: Give all men equal and compulsory paternity leave.
[Guest]: So first of all, compulsory makes it not no longer voluntary, like right now, there is
[Guest]: it is suggested, itna le lo, thoda sa, zyada kam, and then the boss will give dhamki of
[Guest]: appraisal and then make you come to office anyway, or sometimes the man anyway doesn't
[Guest]: want to go.
[Guest]: So he will use the boss as an excuse.
[Guest]: The reason why I think one thing I would change in the world is compulsory paternity leave.
[Guest]: My bigger reason is personal, not professional, which is that I feel that up to a marriage
[Guest]: without children, it is relatively still possible to maintain an equal marriage in the relatively
[Guest]: equal relationship where both partners have their own personal space, professional space,
[Guest]: have their own identities, their own and then pursuing their things in life, growing together,
[Guest]: love, blah, blah.
[Guest]: The critical point beyond which gender roles take over, and in my opinion, 99.99% of marriages
[Guest]: in India are unequal.
[Guest]: And I'm just leaving 0.01% so that people don't get angry at me because not all marriages
[Guest]: hashtag not all marriages.
[Guest]: But otherwise, I have never met any couple which has an equal marriage, including my
[Guest]: own.
[Guest]: So when that happens, the critical point is when you have your first baby, because after
[Guest]: having a baby is a transformative experience for the primary caregiver.
[Guest]: I'm not saying mother, I'm saying primary caregiver.
[Guest]: Whoever is bonding with a baby in their infancy, their brain goes through biological chemical
[Guest]: changes.
[Guest]: They become much more aware of all the, you know, primal risks to the baby's safety.
[Guest]: We're all animalistic programming, which is that when you're caring for an infant, you're
[Guest]: always on the lookout for what all can hurt them, which is how in my house, you will find
[Guest]: no sharp edges anywhere, like fully baby proofed and I walk into a room and now my brain automatically
[Guest]: goes to all the sharp edges where a child can get hurt, even if there's no child in
[Guest]: the room.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of reprogramming that your brain goes through in those early months.
[Guest]: And there's a bonding with a child.
[Guest]: And then there's an awareness of all the mental load that goes with the child, which is, diaper
[Guest]: khatam hone wale hain, bachcha bada ho gaya hain, itna hi kapde kharidne hain.
[Guest]: There's all of these small, small things which add up.
[Guest]: And over time, in the mother's mind, because mothers are the primary caregivers in 100%
[Guest]: of Indian marriages, in the mother's mind, all of this reprogramming has happened.
[Guest]: And the father is not around when this is happening, because there is no compulsory
[Guest]: paternity leave.
[Guest]: And if it is, it's, government gives 15 days, which is I think the best right now, because
[Guest]: private sector mein toh I've heard of men who were doing emailing from the hospital
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: So even Monday to, sunday ko baby aur wednesday ko office bhi nahi hain, it's literally on
[Guest]: the day they are working.
[Guest]: So it's much worse in private sector, but also there in every sector.
[Guest]: So making it compulsory forces the man to be there, even if it is, I'm not saying that
[Guest]: all men need to be forced to be around their kid, but many men will think of it as, yes,
[Guest]: fatherhood is important to me.
[Guest]: But also at the same time, their primary identity in their mind is that I am general manager
[Guest]: so and so, I am senior associate so and so, I am vice president so and so.
[Guest]: That is, to my mind, most men have their primary identity as that, whereas for me as a woman,
[Guest]: I also had that primary identity until three years back and then my brain got reprogrammed
[Guest]: and today my primary identity is that I'm a mother.
[Guest]: If you ask me who are you, first thing I will think of is that.
[Guest]: So that identity shift does not happen in men because they are not around in those initial
[Guest]: crucial months.
[Guest]: And I think if they were around for that period, then even the most hardened of men would actually
[Guest]: come to see life from the perspective of a caregiver, which is how women see it.
[Guest]: And it would equalize so much, it would solve so many problems.
[Guest]: And coming to what you said about how policy has unintentionally disadvantaged women, if
[Guest]: you made it compulsory for men also, then that disadvantage and mismatch goes, right.
[Guest]: Now the company has no added advantage in hiring a man over a woman because chhe maina
[Guest]: dono ko hi dena padega, agar pacha hua toh.
[Guest]: There is another aspect that once I wrote this post, HR head of one of the biggest startups
[Guest]: in India actually discovered it after I wrote this because he had written a book about it
[Guest]: and then he wrote to me and we did a call and he said that I want to talk to you about
[Guest]: this and drill down.
[Guest]: And his thing was that Indian government has forced it on companies and it is unviable
[Guest]: for many companies to give you full salary for six months.
[Guest]: And in many other countries, the government subsidizes it or you have between a couple,
[Guest]: you have one year of leave, toh chahe chhe maina tum chhe maina main, chahe aage peeche,
[Guest]: chahe teen nao, we can divide it, but the government will subsidize our firms for taking
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So, there are many models of making it more doable and practical and viable.
[Guest]: But at the end of the day, I feel very strongly that compulsory and equal paternity leave
[Guest]: for men has to be the lever.
[Amit Varma]: I feel very strongly about the social problem you are describing obviously, but I feel equally
[Amit Varma]: strongly that the coercive hand of the state will not solve it, it will make it worse.
[Amit Varma]: Like first of all, the reason the maternity law backfired so spectacularly is for many
[Amit Varma]: firms is simply they're not viable.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a five person firm, and you're hiring a sixth person, you know, it is not rational
[Amit Varma]: to hire someone who could then just go off on a paid leave for six months, you can't
[Amit Varma]: afford it, your company could go down if something like that happens.
[Amit Varma]: Now it is unfortunate, but it is rational, and I think Tim Lee's had once forecast at
[Amit Varma]: the time this law came out that it would lead to a loss of between eight to 11 lakh jobs
[Amit Varma]: for women.
[Amit Varma]: So forgive me if I get the figure wrong, but I'll link to those pieces by Devika and Suman
[Amit Varma]: in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And the problem that would then happen if you may be you're saying that make it make
[Amit Varma]: a compulsory paternity leave for men as well, which would solve the problem.
[Amit Varma]: It actually wouldn't, because then it would create a bias for hiring unmarried men, with
[Amit Varma]: whom this danger wouldn't be there.
[Amit Varma]: Like honestly, any, you know, there are a lot of social problems, which can only be
[Amit Varma]: solved through voluntary means through social action, you bring the coercive hand of the
[Amit Varma]: state in, it leads to all kinds of perverse outcomes, as has happened with the maternity
[Amit Varma]: leave act, which has really harmed women.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you might think intention is great, you're guaranteeing something that every woman
[Amit Varma]: should be entitled to, but the point is, she's not getting that job in the first place, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: So you have to look at outcome and not intentions, which in my view is, you know, the most common
[Amit Varma]: mistake people make about public policy.
[Guest]: No, fair point.
[Guest]: Only one response is that why would there be a bias for single men, because single men
[Amit Varma]: can also get married and have a baby just as a single woman can get married and have
[Amit Varma]: a baby.
[Amit Varma]: It's probabilistic thinking.
[Amit Varma]: A single man is less likely to be a father, say within a short term period, if he's single.
[Amit Varma]: First he has to get married, then he'll have kids.
[Guest]: That's true of a single woman also.
[Guest]: Single woman also first has to get married and then have kids.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I would imagine there would be more of a bias against a newly married woman than
[Guest]: against a single woman.
[Guest]: Which is true even today.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm saying that between a single man and a single woman, there would be not much difference.
[Guest]: Yeah, but I'm saying, why do you want to, and let me also tell you.
[Guest]: Also, I agree with you that coercive hand of the state is not the answer.
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you what the answer would be in my view.
[Amit Varma]: The answer would be is, what I would like to see, like I always believe that the best
[Amit Varma]: regulation is competition.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't come from the coercive hand of the state.
[Amit Varma]: So what I would love to see is companies competing, where companies can reach out and say, we
[Amit Varma]: want the best talent.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a woman, we'll give you six months maternity leave.
[Amit Varma]: Let somebody else say, we'll give you eight months.
[Amit Varma]: Let somebody say, paternity leave six months, we'll give you, let them compete on that front.
[Amit Varma]: But before they compete on that front, what is important is that those things, six months
[Amit Varma]: paternity leave, etc, etc, become attractive enough for society at large, for it to be
[Amit Varma]: viable for companies to compete on that front.
[Amit Varma]: And for that you need a change in social attitudes, which happens at a glacial pace, which society
[Amit Varma]: might even go backwards sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, a coercive hand of the state won't get there.
[Amit Varma]: So that is just my sort of a little, No, I don't know about that.
[Guest]: Because I was about to say what you said about competition, because there are all these gender
[Guest]: rankings these days, you know, I mean, and many companies will proudly put it on their
[Guest]: website, Badasa banner ke, ranked number one in so and so gender ranking, great workplace
[Guest]: for women.
[Guest]: So that is already happening to some extent.
[Guest]: But it is in all of these, you know, tier one, tier two polished companies, where white
[Guest]: color office or AC andar.
[Guest]: But what about the women who are working, say, in public sector bank or in a machine,
[Amit Varma]: factory?
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm saying that the coercive hand of the state is will make their lives worse.
[Amit Varma]: It's not even a partial solution.
[Amit Varma]: It is not a solution at all, it literally makes the problem worse.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't just mean in this context, or maternity leave or whatever, in literally
[Amit Varma]: anything where the state passes regulation with a good intention, you really need to
[Amit Varma]: look at the outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, India's, for example, been hobbled so long by bad labor laws, which are meant
[Amit Varma]: to protect labor, but have exactly the opposite impact.
[Amit Varma]: And we've suffered so deeply for that, you know, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a minor point.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I, you know, solutions are a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: But I totally agree with you on the extent of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And if men were forced to look after their kids for the first six months, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: would hope that at least some of the blindness and the unseen nature of what it involves
[Amit Varma]: would go away.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, there is no perfect answer right now on how it should be done.
[Guest]: Because like you're saying, the self-voluntary thing will happen, like, it's like saying
[Guest]: caste system jab jaayega tab toilet banayenge.
[Guest]: So, it's also that, that difference is there.
[Guest]: Like for me personally, I just became a mother three years back.
[Guest]: And if this law was not there, maybe like the US, I would have been forced to come with
[Guest]: my surgery, stitches still unhealed and come into work and sit at a desk crying because
[Guest]: I'm still undergoing postpartum depression and my baby is, one week old baby is being
[Guest]: handled by someone else.
[Guest]: So, that real impact meri life mein, it has made my life tangibly better, even though
[Guest]: I agree with you that in the long run, it has hurt women professionally.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's unseen, right?
[Amit Varma]: All the women who didn't have a job to begin with, because they never got hired, because
[Amit Varma]: incentive, because it's perverted the incentives.
[Amit Varma]: I totally agree with you on the desirability of it, but can it be enforced by the state
[Amit Varma]: as a...
[Guest]: Yeah, that's what, so the way we do it is different.
[Guest]: But I think my point and that I've made in the piece also is I'm not taking a stand on
[Guest]: how it should be done, but this is something that will solve a huge amount of gender issues,
[Guest]: not just at the workplace, but also in our private lives.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I couldn't agree more.
[Amit Varma]: So let's now go to the other domain where women are kind of also stuck and there's no
[Amit Varma]: getting away from it, which is a domain of the home, right?
[Amit Varma]: And this is also where stereotypes about what roles are, can be particularly pernicious.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written a great post, which also became incredibly viral, I think it's one
[Amit Varma]: of your most popular posts called the Raja Beta Syndrome.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about Raja Beta.
[Guest]: What is Raja Beta?
[Guest]: So Raja Beta Syndrome was one of those posts, which I wrote thinking that this is very obvious.
[Guest]: Like you said, you know, everyone knows what's in it.
[Guest]: As literally, it was like a slow work week at womaning, and I wrote that post, like everyone
[Guest]: knows this story, let's write this this time.
[Guest]: And somehow it just caught on, and to this day, I get screenshots from people that, you
[Guest]: know, I'm on so and so WhatsApp group, and randomly someone's posted your Raja Beta piece
[Guest]: there and I'm like, he's still roaming around.
[Guest]: But it has, it took a life of its own.
[Guest]: So Raja Beta Syndrome is essentially that in the Indian, average Indian family, we will
[Guest]: treat our boys as royalty, right from the day they're born.
[Guest]: And even before they're born, we are doing gender selection of children, infants and
[Guest]: fetuses.
[Guest]: But even the, and during childhood, obviously, partial treatment to the son.
[Guest]: But the interesting bit is that even after they grow into adults, we continue to treat
[Guest]: our sons like Rajas and princes actually, Rajkumar.
[Guest]: So and then it's a very common, in the Hindi belt at least, thing for parents, especially
[Guest]: mothers to say, yeh mera Raja beta hai.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how you show love.
[Guest]: Raja beta, Raja.
[Guest]: So that's, that's how many North Indian parents and mothers especially will show love to the
[Guest]: child.
[Guest]: And theek hai for jab tak wo beta chhota sa beta hai, theek hai, ab banao Raja beta hai.
[Guest]: And there is obviously no Rani beti, but fir bhi, ab banao, ab theek hai, it's a, it's
[Guest]: a child ultimately, and it's getting love.
[Guest]: It's sad that the other child is not getting as much love, but children, all children receive
[Guest]: and deserve love.
[Guest]: So theek hai, up to that point, it's fine.
[Guest]: But the funny thing is when you grow up and you're a 40 year old man and 60 year old man
[Guest]: and you're still the Raja beta of the house, that's where it gets funny.
[Guest]: So this, this piece is a compilation of many stories from women about how many of them
[Guest]: are in quote unquote equal marriages where the man is also doing the dishes, the man
[Guest]: is also helping in the kitchen and couple, especially before children, like I said, it
[Guest]: is possible to have some semblance of equality or equity.
[Guest]: And chal riya life waisi, but suddenly, saas-sasur aake rehna shuru inge and women have said
[Guest]: that we visibly see a difference in our husbands, that they just turn into some other creatures
[Guest]: and they turn into this creature called Raja beta, which is ke paani ka glass utha karke
[Guest]: kitchen mein nahi rakhna hai.
[Guest]: So there's a story there about how there's this couple settled in London and she's, the
[Guest]: wife is working at her desk and she tells the husband, can you just refill my glass
[Guest]: of water and he does it and the mother-in-law who's visiting them is horrified and next
[Guest]: time she's keeping an eye on that glass, ke kab iska paani thoda kam ho and runs and
[Guest]: picks up that glass and goes back to the kitchen to refill it, ke kahi mein Raja beta ko ungli
[Guest]: nahi uthaani par jaye, should not have to lift a finger.
[Guest]: And so similarly, ke bartan karte hua, acha nahi lagta beta karta hua, main kar dungi.
[Guest]: So mothers-in-law are most guilty of this, ke don't disturb him, I will do this.
[Guest]: There's a story of a mother whose breastfeeding mother just gone back to work, so life is
[Guest]: as stressful as it can be.
[Guest]: And she says, I come back home and my mother-in-law is already in the kitchen, the husband has
[Guest]: reached before but he's watching TV and mother-in-law has already got a list of chores ready for
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: When I still have to feed the baby, I still have come back after a long commute from work,
[Guest]: this fellow sitting at home working from home and watching TV and if I try to involve him
[Guest]: also in the chores, she'll come and physically body-block me that nahi, nahi, usko disturb
[Guest]: mat karo, wo aaraam kar raha hai.
[Guest]: Physically body-block me?
[Guest]: Basically, yeah, that happens.
[Guest]: So I mean, so that's, those were the stories that I got from many women and I put them
[Guest]: together and I used this from the movie Mughal-e-Azam and how Dilip Kumar ke around sab log dance
[Guest]: chal raha hai, pyaar kiya toh dar na kiya, sab log usko aankhe wo, Anarkali usko gulab
[Guest]: deti hai aur Raj Mata is looking at him with those heart-shaped eyes and so that's pretty
[Guest]: much how it plays out in most Indian households and it really struck a chord.
[Guest]: Like I said, for me it was a very obvious, almost banal thing that I wrote but then when
[Guest]: I wrote, put it out, women were like this, yahi, yahi toh hai, sachai, yahi hai asliyat
[Guest]: and so to this day, it's being circulated.
[Guest]: I keep getting messages of people who've just discovered it and loved it.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of your GIFs there has this caption of Raj Mata ji looking really upset and I
[Amit Varma]: love the caption which is Raj Mata, when Raja beta accidentally does a chore and you've
[Amit Varma]: also sort of pointed out something that I found really amusing that a couple of the
[Amit Varma]: women were I think talking about how normally my husband helps out but when his parents
[Amit Varma]: come he will try to hide that he's helping out, you know, which is a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: kind of preference falsification because preference falsification is when you feel one way but
[Amit Varma]: the general norm is something else so you don't show it, right?
[Amit Varma]: And normally the way preference falsification plays out is that you feel something regressive,
[Unknown]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Like, but because you're not supposed to say these things in a polite society, you don't
[Amit Varma]: say it, you know, unless a switch is flicked or something and here it's like the other
[Amit Varma]: way around, that the guy actually feels something progressive, he feels he should help his wife
[Amit Varma]: but he's scared to kind of act out on it in front of his mother or his parents or whatever
[Guest]: which is...
[Guest]: Right, so preference falsification is about hiding shameful feelings and so that's the
[Guest]: point I'm trying to make that wanting to be an equal husband to your wife is a shameful
[Amit Varma]: feeling to this day.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of stereotype which hobbles women at home is the pressure to make babies, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like you have a post about this as well about how so many women are just looked at as child
[Amit Varma]: bearing vessels, that if you haven't had a child, it's a problem, you know, random uncles
[Amit Varma]: you meet once in eight years will be saying when is a good news beta and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth.
[Amit Varma]: At some point, you know, one of your, I think, was it you writing about yourself or one of
[Amit Varma]: your guests, where good things happen at this gathering and everybody's congratulating you
[Amit Varma]: and all and then this auntie lady type calls you to the side and instead of congratulating
[Amit Varma]: you about how well your career is going, she says, yeh sab toh hota rahega, tum yeh batao
[Guest]: ki bachche karne ka kya plan hai.
[Guest]: Yeah, that was me.
[Amit Varma]: That was you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how these pressures play out because like one of the themes I've
[Amit Varma]: been exploring in past episodes is this distinction between thick and thin desires, where thick
[Amit Varma]: desires are desires which are kind of intrinsic to you, but thin desires are mimetic desires.
[Amit Varma]: So they are mimetic desires in the sense that you want something because somebody else wants
[Amit Varma]: it or it seems like something that is you start desiring it not for rational reasons
[Amit Varma]: of your own, but because it seems something like that.
[Amit Varma]: So I could want a Mercedes C class and that's a thin desire because it's not intrinsic.
[Amit Varma]: Or I think the most common thin desire would be people wanting to get married and have
[Guest]: kids.
[Guest]: Right, right.
[Amit Varma]: And they may not intrinsically crave the companionship or any of the things that are beautiful about
[Amit Varma]: marriage or they may not crave parenthood or they may not even want to be parents.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just the way that life unfolds and therefore you're supposed to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And is this a sort of chakra view that women are then trapped in, that once you enter the
[Amit Varma]: flow of things, it's incredibly hard to get out.
[Amit Varma]: So even if you're in a, you know, relatively modern marriage where you and your partner
[Amit Varma]: can decide that you don't want to do it, but despite that, those pressures are sort of
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: It's just this constant din in your head.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, so those are definitely there and they're expressed much more strongly or enforced much
[Guest]: more strongly on women than on men.
[Guest]: So yeah, there is a thing, timeline about you have to be married by this age.
[Guest]: And again, that timeline is much more flexible for men than for women, not just for biological
[Guest]: reasons, but also social reasons.
[Guest]: So a 40 year old man is still, obviously our single son, but a 30 year old single woman
[Guest]: is just the worst thing that has happened to our parents ever.
[Guest]: So that's, I've also been on the receiving side of it because by Punjabi standards, I
[Guest]: married late.
[Guest]: And so my single status was like a societal issue being discussed often at large social
[Guest]: gatherings.
[Guest]: And so, I mean, again, credit to my parents that they didn't let a lot of that pressure
[Guest]: transfer to me.
[Guest]: And I also very consciously was living across, halfway across the country to avoid that.
[Guest]: But it is real, it was not a big desire for me in my life at that point of time.
[Guest]: But it was just something that you, thin desire is something that you want because you're
[Guest]: supposed to want it, essentially.
[Guest]: So it was just that, oh, you should want to get married because you should want to get
[Guest]: married.
[Guest]: There's no better reason for it.
[Guest]: And in that rush for these thin desires, we also ignore the quality aspect of it, that
[Guest]: it should be a good marriage is not something that's on the agenda.
[Guest]: It has to be a marriage.
[Guest]: That is all that we want, right, from women, shadi karlo bas, kisi se karlo.
[Guest]: So and over time, even our standards of the kind of guy will keep falling because tumhara
[Guest]: shelf life khatam ho raha hai.
[Guest]: So it's actually getting worse as you're aging because your prospects will be much thinner.
[Guest]: And many points in my life, I've been told that I will not be able to find a husband
[Guest]: while I was single for various reasons.
[Guest]: So so yeah, this is this this pressure is real on women and the pressure similarly to
[Guest]: have kids is very real.
[Guest]: And I think I've given an example of a woman who was in an abusive marriage also, who was
[Guest]: being forced ke bachcha karlo.
[Guest]: So that's another very classic Indian thing ke you are in already in a toxic relationship
[Guest]: which which needs to end, which deserves to end, which should be ended.
[Guest]: And instead, the solution that society chipkaos on it is bachcha karlo.
[Guest]: And bachcha is not going to solve a bad marriage, it's going to make things worse, because bachcha
[Guest]: is a huge amount of responsibility.
[Guest]: And you should not bring a child into a marriage that is already already disturbed in any way.
[Guest]: I mean, I personally feel there should be an entrance exam before having kids.
[Amit Varma]: Aap toh coercive hand of state har cheez me.
[Guest]: Har cheez me daal toh mere aisaam se toh.
[Guest]: Ek UPSC ka exam iske le bhi rakho ki certificate jab tak nahi halega, bachche nahi kar sakte
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: So, screwed up situations in which I have seen kids being brought into is criminal.
[Guest]: So I don't agree with you that having kids is immoral, but it is immoral to have kids
[Guest]: in such situations.
[Amit Varma]: When you're not ready, which I think is actually the, I love this poem by Philip Larkin, so
[Amit Varma]: I'm just going to read it out here.
[Amit Varma]: It's called this be the worst.
[Amit Varma]: They fuck you up your mom and dad, they may not mean to, but they do.
[Amit Varma]: They fill you with the faults they had and add some extra just for you.
[Amit Varma]: But they were fucked up in their turn by fools in old style hats and coats, who half the
[Amit Varma]: time was soppy stern and half at one another's throats.
[Amit Varma]: Man hands on misery to man, it deepens like a coastal shelf.
[Amit Varma]: Get out as early as you can, and don't have any kids yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I love these lines also just as poetry man hands on misery to man it deepens like
[Amit Varma]: a coastal shelf.
[Amit Varma]: What a lovely line.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of talk about, you know, another aspect that I think is unseen to most people.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps often women may not also think about it in these terms, which is mental load,
[Amit Varma]: which is an invisible labor of managing a household.
[Amit Varma]: Now I'll quote these lovely lines because, you know, you might be modest about this,
[Amit Varma]: but a lot of your writing really sparkles.
[Amit Varma]: And these lines are from the end of your post on this where you write quote, men, can I
[Amit Varma]: tell you a secret?
[Amit Varma]: If you think that the romance in your life has dwindled after a few years of marriage,
[Amit Varma]: it might be because your wife is now basically a grocery list trapped in the body of a woman.
[Amit Varma]: Try taking some of the mental load off her brain.
[Amit Varma]: And behold, as she begins to turn human again, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then you point out that your husband just installed a grocery app on his phone and you
[Amit Varma]: love him more than ever.
[Amit Varma]: But elaborate on this a bit a grocery list trapped in the body of a woman.
[Amit Varma]: You know, elaborate on this because I, you know, someone like me, when I'm working on
[Amit Varma]: something during the day, I have the luxury of locking myself in my room and thinking
[Amit Varma]: of nothing but whatever it is that I'm working on.
[Unknown]: Women can never do that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Mostly.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about why.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think I've heard in one of your episodes, you criticizing people who criticize Gal Newport,
[Guest]: the deep work thing.
[Guest]: And people, people like me basically who say that deep work are privileges available only
[Amit Varma]: to men.
[Amit Varma]: No, I say that myself.
[Amit Varma]: But I think criticizing Gal Newport for it is not fair because Newport actually, for
[Amit Varma]: those who've read the book, he talks about four models of work.
[Amit Varma]: And that deep work thing where you lock yourself up for a long period of time is one of those
[Amit Varma]: four models of work.
[Amit Varma]: There are other models of work, which, you know, the way Walter Isaacson, for example,
[Amit Varma]: does it switching on and off is what women are basically doing all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't think so.
[Amit Varma]: I think people attack a straw man version of the book.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, as I said earlier, I agree that, you know, that women have it much harder and
[Amit Varma]: even some men have it much harder that you cannot, you may not always have the luck and
[Amit Varma]: the privilege to set aside large chunks of time.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not what Newport is saying.
[Amit Varma]: Newport is laying out a bouquet of options, but sorry, carry on.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I mean, I find most of male self-help and productivity hacks and tips to be very, have
[Guest]: to have that carry that blind spot with them that they're designed by men and for men.
[Guest]: And it's not things that women can ever conceivably do because, again, of the gender roles that
[Guest]: we have and the extra amount of responsibility that is thrust on women.
[Guest]: So yeah, how, what it means to be a walking grocery list.
[Guest]: So I am a walking grocery list and the, another analogy that my husband and I often use is
[Guest]: tabs.
[Guest]: Mere dimaag mein kitni tabs open hai, like on a browser.
[Guest]: At any point of time, I'm like, I have got like dhai so tabs open in my mind.
[Guest]: It's equivalent of how much stress it is when you have dhai so tabs open on your browser.
[Guest]: That's how many things I'm thinking of at any given point of time.
[Guest]: I think this conversation with you is the, probably the longest break that I have taken
[Guest]: away from child care in probably forever since I had a kid.
[Guest]: So I mean, even now there are things that I'm thinking of which are happening behind,
[Guest]: I mean, what's happening with the baby.
[Guest]: School se kisi ne pick up kiya ke nahi, khana khaya hoga ke nahi, wo face pe rash ho rahi
[Guest]: thi uspe kisi ne cream lagayi ke nahi, wo jo school se ek note aaya tha uske liye, us
[Guest]: din ethnic kapde pehna ke bhejne hai, wo dhula hai kurta ke nahi dhula hai, and press ho
[Guest]: ke aagaya hoga kya hai, aur wo press wali ne itne din se phone nahi kara usko bulana
[Guest]: hai aur ek baat karne thi uska, wo account settle karna hai and this is how my brain
[Guest]: goes and I just go on and on and on and this is how many, most women will think.
[Guest]: So sometimes I mean, I'm looking like my system is going to crash and I have to tell Salil
[Guest]: that listen, too many tabs, not able to function anymore and then he'll say, okay, let's sit
[Guest]: down and we'll write it down or something.
[Guest]: But the fact of the matter is these tabs are not open in his mind.
[Guest]: I mean, as much eager and genuine partner that he wants to be, these tabs are not, are
[Guest]: only there in my mind.
[Guest]: And then there are many, this is again, well-documented phenomena and men have many rationals, excuses,
[Guest]: explanations for it, ke, oh ye to, you have higher standards and that's why you have these
[Guest]: tabs, like most of the things you're thinking of don't actually need to be done.
[Guest]: But then when they're not done is when you realize the fallout of it.
[Guest]: So, so much work that you're doing is preemptive and it is again, therefore unseen, you know,
[Guest]: because those women who never had those jobs, you don't know about them.
[Guest]: So similarly, all those accidents that didn't happen because I baby-proofed the house are
[Guest]: things that we don't know about at all because how many times he bumped his head on the edge
[Guest]: of a baby-proof table is not something that we are keeping count of.
[Guest]: So these are things that mental load that, that is only there on women because physical
[Guest]: load to a lot of extent, the more evolved of partners are able to share.
[Guest]: So like even in my household, laundry or yesab, things that the chores that we are still doing
[Guest]: that we don't have a help for, chores are equally distributed between us.
[Guest]: Even the time that we spend with our child is, now that I'm also after COVID doing full-time
[Guest]: work is relatively fair division, not equal but equitable.
[Guest]: But this is one place where there is no semblance of equalities, like 99% is only 1% there.
[Guest]: And so, so, and it's all sorts of labor, you know, it's also about, tumhari mumme ka birthday
[Guest]: aane wala hai, mujhe yaad hai unko ek gift kharid ki Amazon se mahaan bhejna hai.
[Guest]: So you know, these things also, it's also emotional labor.
[Guest]: It's also that so-and-so helped us at that time, now we should go there about to have
[Guest]: a baby, we should go help them with this thing.
[Guest]: All of these burdens, managing relationships, keeping the household running, even when you
[Guest]: do have staff, the staff wants to come, bhabhi se baat karni hai, because I have this issue,
[Guest]: mujhe us din chutti chahiye.
[Guest]: Now you have to plan your house around that, things, ration khatam ho raha hai kitchen mein,
[Guest]: you have to do this.
[Guest]: And so, this is what I've written about in the piece also, and this is the, I think the
[Guest]: second most popular piece after Raja Beta.
[Guest]: Because again, it struck a chord with so many women, like women wrote to me after this that
[Guest]: my husband is VP Finance in one of the biggest firms in India, and yet he's not able to manage
[Guest]: ghar mein aata khatam ho raha hai, he's not able to keep it stocked.
[Guest]: So am I supposed to believe that he's incompetent and he's not able to do this?
[Guest]: Obviously he's able to do this, he's intelligent enough to do it.
[Guest]: It's just a matter of kar rahi hai na woh, why should I step up?
[Guest]: And so over time, then one person gets stuck with that role.
[Guest]: And then that person also gets stuck in their mind about the way it is to be done.
[Guest]: So you know, like your podcast, how you edit it, how you design it, something you've been
[Guest]: doing for so long that now, it might not even be easy for you to delegate some key aspect
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: Or if I come and do it for you, you might not like it the way I've done it.
[Guest]: And so that also happens.
[Guest]: So it then, even when men try to help, sometimes women will push back.
[Guest]: And it happens to me also.
[Guest]: Sometimes I'll say, you're doing it all wrong, let me do it myself.
[Guest]: Aur tumne galat tarah ka chawal order kar di.
[Guest]: So now I will do it, I have to do everything myself.
[Guest]: And then we'll have a discussion about it, then I'll realize that, you know, I'm right
[Guest]: now gatekeeping something that I don't really have to, and I need to consciously let go
[Guest]: of this.
[Guest]: Because I've been doing it for so long, and I've become set in the way that I do it.
[Guest]: And therefore the man feels ke not worth the trouble, let her handle it.
[Guest]: But that in the long run breeds this resentment and this gap, the chasm between us of how
[Guest]: many tabs are open in whose mind.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And that metaphor of tabs open is really quite, you know, hits home, because you know what
[Amit Varma]: happens when Chrome crashes, and everything just sort of freezes right there, you've got
[Amit Varma]: another great post called fabulous lives of Indian housewives, which I'm sure is also
[Amit Varma]: extremely popular, where you quote someone called Anu, who says something that speaks
[Amit Varma]: exactly to what you were just saying, where she says, quote, it angers me that for ages,
[Amit Varma]: men have been chilling.
[Amit Varma]: And by chilling, I mean having a normal intellectually stimulating adult day at work, and also coming
[Amit Varma]: home to their wives expecting to be pampered.
[Amit Varma]: All the while, the really hard physical and mental labor was done by the wife staying
[Amit Varma]: back at home, I come to my office and feel incredibly grateful to have a place to poop
[Amit Varma]: in peace.
[Amit Varma]: I have nothing but respect for stay at home mothers now, stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And this also underscores how, you know, some people might think of it as a dichotomy between
[Amit Varma]: women who have chosen to work and who go to office and all of that, and stay at home mothers,
[Amit Varma]: as if stay at home mothers are not doing anything.
[Amit Varma]: And people will think of stay at home mothers, and they'll say, they'll be like, okay,
[Amit Varma]: she's taking care of the house, or cooking food, but otherwise, she's just chilling,
[Unknown]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not like that at all.
[Amit Varma]: It is an incredibly arduous amount of work.
[Amit Varma]: And worst of all, it is the kind of work where you can't really focus on anything and get
[Amit Varma]: deep work done, as it were, you know, in fact, if you read Newport's book, you'll find that
[Amit Varma]: he has nothing but sympathy for this.
[Amit Varma]: He describes this kind of situation, where people are constantly forced to be in a state
[Amit Varma]: of shallow work.
[Amit Varma]: And really, being in a state of shallow concentration is something that is good only for managers
[Amit Varma]: who are scheduling meeting after meeting after meeting.
[Amit Varma]: But to get any meaningful work done, you need to figure out a way to get deep work.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so often, progressive people will almost in a sense, even women kind of
[Amit Varma]: look down on housewives and housewifery, as it were, and will think, oh, okay, if you're
[Amit Varma]: a modern woman, you have to work.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, work is work, life is stuff, you know, something.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this and about how mindsets around this revolve.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, like you said, it's not only that a woman working at home, first of all,
[Guest]: I love this line from the book Invisible Women, which says that working woman is a tautology.
[Guest]: It means that it's unnecessary to add the word working, because every woman is working.
[Guest]: So it's only that some women are being paid for that work and some are not.
[Guest]: So there's literally just no woman who's not working, even a stay at home mother is a working
[Guest]: mother.
[Guest]: And that for me was a very powerful statement.
[Guest]: And it really makes sense.
[Guest]: Because especially now I've seen being at home for two years for the pandemic before
[Guest]: that on my maternity leave, and I've realized how hard it is.
[Guest]: And I completely agree with Anu there that, you know, now that I go to a workplace, it's
[Guest]: really recreation for me, it is relaxation.
[Guest]: Like as a mother who is at home, you genuinely don't have time to poop in peace.
[Guest]: Because there's always the door is open, because you're worried the child will go and put their
[Guest]: finger in an electric socket or something.
[Guest]: So often children are inside the bathroom when you're pooping.
[Guest]: You don't get time to comb your hair, you barely get time to take a shower.
[Guest]: Sometimes you don't remember if you brushed your teeth this morning or not.
[Guest]: So that's the amount of stress that work is.
[Guest]: And it is a work which comes with no perks, no compensation, and no breaks, right?
[Guest]: Like if I have a very, very stressful work also, there is a weekend to look forward to,
[Guest]: there is an evening where I clock out, something to look forward to.
[Guest]: But as a mother, stay at home mother, there is no break, there will never be a day when
[Guest]: you get, kya aaj bachche nahi, aaj chhutti hai bachche hone se, aur aaj relaxation hai.
[Guest]: Unless your partner is kind enough to take them out of the house for a few hours.
[Guest]: But other than that, it's a 24-7 job.
[Guest]: So it's much more stressful and I mean, I've quoted Anu here because Anu and I used to
[Guest]: work together when we were both single and living in Bombay.
[Guest]: We worked together in the same company and we were taking a walk somewhere around our
[Guest]: office one day and we saw a woman at a window.
[Guest]: And so I began this piece with that and Anu was like, ek din main wo aurat banungi, ye
[Guest]: meri aspiration hai, wo aurat jo face mask laga ke gharke pe baith ke chai piyegi, aur
[Guest]: din main bhaar dekhe ki, ye dekho ye gadhe jaa rahe hain office.
[Guest]: So that was the, I mean that was a running joke between us, ke hamari life ki aspiration
[Guest]: hai ki ghar pe baithna aur chai peena aur face mask lagana hai.
[Guest]: But now, I mean now that we are both mothers, we realize how blind that image of a stay
[Guest]: at home mother is and that's how unfair it is and how far away from reality that perception
[Guest]: is.
[Amit Varma]: So that's really the hardest job there is.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out that one of the things that really irritates you is when people idolize
[Amit Varma]: or romanticize the sacrifices that women make, you know, I think you reproduced that advertisement
[Amit Varma]: in your post or it was a fake newswala meme that a woman with an oxygen cylinder on or
[Amit Varma]: whatever covid ka mask was ka on is also cooking meal for the family and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And you'll have these classic memes of superwoman with eight hands doing everything at once.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is that, you know, in a sense, you're trying to glorify the woman who does
[Amit Varma]: everything.
[Amit Varma]: But your point is, no, don't romanticize that.
[Unknown]: It's terrible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the man who took the picture should really be doing all the work.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this, because this seems to me to be particularly dangerous.
[Amit Varma]: Because the moment you romanticize it, you make it a thin desire for many women ki mujhe
[Amit Varma]: bhi banna hai superwoman, main bhi karungi.
[Amit Varma]: And you make it something that men also then expect from their wives, right?
[Guest]: So tell me a little bit about this.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And that wasn't fake news.
[Guest]: That was a real photograph of his mother that a man had put up and his mother.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I thought I was actually, I thought baad mein nikhla tha ki woh, achha maybe I'm maybe I'm
[Amit Varma]: confusing it with some other picture.
[Guest]: Maine aisa kuch nahi padha baad mein kyuki I was also googling that image later to write
[Guest]: this piece.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe again, I also might have missed it.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe I'm mixing it up with some other picture.
[Guest]: But yeah, this was at least as far as the world knew it at the time and the discourse
[Guest]: around it was, it was a real picture of a mother who is an aged senior lady who's on
[Guest]: an oxygen concentrator during COVID second wave where people are dying and oxygen are
[Guest]: going low and woh concentrator laga ke she's standing in the kitchen making round rotis
[Guest]: for her son.
[Guest]: And this useless son who's presumably healthy and not hooked up to a cylinder is standing
[Guest]: in the kitchen and instead of taking over from his mother is taking her photo and uploads
[Guest]: it on social media saying ki yeh hoti hai maa, yeh hoti hai sachhi maa.
[Guest]: And that's what drew so much flak and I'm glad we live in a time where it draws flak
[Guest]: and people are forced to reconsider these things.
[Guest]: But that's the trope of Mother India and you know, I mean, I used to, I still joke that
[Guest]: you know Mother's Day should be called Happy Martyrs Day because we just love turning our
[Guest]: mothers into martyrs ki unhone maar le itna kuch kiya, unhone maar le sabko chhod diya.
[Guest]: And even today on Women's Day and all you'll see LinkedIn pe these professionally accomplished
[Guest]: men are putting up posts of I want to take this day to thank my wife.
[Guest]: She gave up her career and raised our child and I went out and she wanted to work but
[Guest]: she couldn't work because she supported my career.
[Guest]: Like shame on you.
[Guest]: This is not something to be proud of.
[Guest]: You killed your wife's dreams and then you're now showing it off and tumhara ek social media
[Amit Varma]: post likhne se ho gaya, ho gaya kya uska compensation ne.
[Amit Varma]: Tu toh proud hai apne wife ka, why don't you ask her if she's proud of you.
[Guest]: Exactly, yeah.
[Guest]: Let's, let's hear the other side also.
[Guest]: So I mean that's, that's my problem with it and I think in the beginning also I used the
[Guest]: word celebrated and I said no we should, celebrate is the wrong word, we should say acknowledged
[Guest]: because women doing everything is not something to be celebrated, it's something for us to
[Guest]: be ashamed of as a society.
[Guest]: That we are forcing our women to do cooking, cleaning, ghar ka samaan, bahar ka, fir office
[Guest]: bhi jao, woh bhi sambhalo aur uske baad wahan pe boys club se bhi maar khao, idhar ghar
[Guest]: pe patiks ke liye bhi rotiya gol banao, toh I mean if we are truly putting this much burden
[Guest]: on women that every Mother's Day you see or every Women's Day you see that woman with
[Guest]: eight hands, ek haath mein tawa, ek haath mein bachcha, ek haath mein laptop, ek haath
[Guest]: mein press ironing, toh woh image jo hai that's a matter of shame and I feel that's what the
[Guest]: women also who I interviewed for this piece were echoing.
[Guest]: One of them said that someone put up in her office, put up a thing outside her door, superwoman
[Guest]: because she was a working mother of two and blah blah blah, so she was like ye hatao,
[Guest]: I don't want to be a superwoman, let me be just a woman, I want to be human, it's a privilege,
[Guest]: it's my right to be left alone to be human and you are not giving me that right, you
[Guest]: are forcing this superwoman down my throat, not just the person who's put up the board,
[Guest]: society, family, everyone and by raising me, holding me to these high standards, you are
[Guest]: getting away with murder, you are getting away with not caregiving for your children,
[Guest]: taking care of your house and pulling your weight at either the workplace or at home
[Guest]: and so don't make us super, we are quite happy being human and let us just be human, that's
[Guest]: basically what the entire movement is about, let women be human.
[Amit Varma]: Abhi toh Salman Khan aa jaayega aapka newsletter ki sponsorship karne, because being human
[Guest]: ke saath toh jaata hi hai.
[Guest]: I'm happy to wear his t-shirt, junko hi nahi kehta sponsorship.
[Amit Varma]: There's a larger question.
[Amit Varma]: In the same post about fabulous lives of Indian housewives, you quote someone called Meeta
[Amit Varma]: who is separated from her husband and you quote her as saying, quote, I have never slept
[Amit Varma]: better in my life, right?
[Amit Varma]: Elsewhere, you talk about how divorces are going up and I think 12 years or 13 years
[Amit Varma]: ago, I'd got a bit of flack when I wrote a column saying that rising divorce rates in
[Amit Varma]: India is something we should celebrate.
[Amit Varma]: It means that more and more women are being empowered to get out of toxic marriages, right?
[Amit Varma]: You've also written posts, like there's one post called the Great Indian Dhakosla.
[Amit Varma]: You've written a very powerful post on domestic violence as well.
[Amit Varma]: And this leads me to this larger sort of question about the institution of marriage itself.
[Amit Varma]: I think that the way the institution of marriage is conceived, that conception is toxic, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because men and women are kind of fixed in their roles in a way that you have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: outlined here, how men are the Raja betas and women are fixed and trapped and imprisoned
[Amit Varma]: in models of lives, which completely destroy them, like, you know, their lives are just
[Amit Varma]: taken away from them by these roles that they're force fitted into.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking that and my point is not at all that people should not get married.
[Amit Varma]: I've already said people shouldn't have kids.
[Amit Varma]: My point is not at all that people don't get married, marriage can be beautiful when you
[Amit Varma]: marry someone who's your friend, you've got companionship.
[Amit Varma]: If you choose to have a family together, there's lots that beautiful about it.
[Amit Varma]: But the conception of marriage as it is today, seems to me to be toxic and one sidedly toxic.
[Amit Varma]: I think it also in a small way harms men by trapping them in these stereotypes, which
[Amit Varma]: can hurt them also, but it is almost completely one sidedly toxic, it destroys women's lives,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: So, do you think in a thought experiment, as society keeps changing over decades and
[Amit Varma]: perhaps centuries, that this institution will appear unnecessary?
[Amit Varma]: That it can become possible for men and women to associate with each other to have the kind
[Amit Varma]: of relationships they want to have with each other by mutual consent with agreed upon roles
[Amit Varma]: and demarcations without this actual institution and all the negativity that it carries?
[Guest]: So, I wrote this post in February of this year, which I celebrated as Valentine's month
[Guest]: and for weeks I wrote four posts about dating and different stages of life, different modes
[Guest]: of dating.
[Guest]: One of them was about dating in your 40s, 50s and 60s.
[Guest]: And that is the one that I love the most.
[Guest]: I think the biggest scam in society today is that women are, young women and girls are
[Guest]: conditioned to see marriage as an achievement or a trophy.
[Guest]: And so you'll have these tropes and based on reality, that the woman is chasing the
[Guest]: man for proposing and the man is like commitment phobic and running away from it.
[Guest]: I've had that experience myself, plenty of commitment phobic men, but it's now in hindsight
[Guest]: I'm like, what is wrong with us for chasing this institution, which is so disadvantageous
[Guest]: to us, like you said, unidirectionally toxic, right?
[Guest]: So I mean, it makes, and there's a lot of research there about it, about how married
[Guest]: women have a shorter lifespan than unmarried women.
[Guest]: Married men have a longer lifespan than unmarried men.
[Guest]: So it's obvious who the institution of marriage is benefiting more in terms of happiness,
[Guest]: longevity, health, all dimensions.
[Guest]: It's obvious that marriage is better for men than it is for women.
[Guest]: And so the trope should be that men should be chasing women around the street, that please
[Amit Varma]: marry me.
[Guest]: But they do, they do, that's also a problem.
[Guest]: That's a whole other problem, but I'm saying between consensual relationships, one common
[Guest]: trope is that women should marry and men shouldn't, at least in the young age.
[Guest]: That's why I love that post about dating in your 40s, 50s, 60s, because so one very interesting
[Guest]: and my favorite, one of my favorite insights that I got interviewing women who are dating
[Guest]: at that age was that by this age, most of us have had one marriage at least, right?
[Guest]: So the men are also divorced or widowed, women are also divorced or widowed, only few are
[Guest]: single at that age.
[Guest]: So after having had one experience of marriage, all the women have figured out, this is not
[Guest]: a trap I want to fall into, mujhe nahi firse kisi ki mummy banna, like that's what Indian
[Guest]: men are looking for in their wives is mummy, toh mujhe nahi banna apne partner ki mummy.
[Guest]: So she said that at this stage of life, and the reverse has happened for the men because
[Guest]: they realized how comfortable and luxurious their life was when they had this person doing
[Guest]: invisible caregiving work for their family and them.
[Guest]: And somewhere in the background, magically chai ke cups are being produced and food is
[Guest]: appearing on the table and you don't have to worry about kichan mein chawal khatam because
[Guest]: somebody else is thinking about it all the time.
[Guest]: So men have figured out the comforts of marriage and women have figured out the traps of it.
[Guest]: And so at that age, she told me that it's oolta, like every man I date is looking to
[Guest]: set, so quote unquote settle down and wants to immediately get married.
[Guest]: And women are like, sorry, casual.
[Guest]: So it's amazing.
[Guest]: I loved it.
[Guest]: That at least now, slowly, even after having had a bad experience, at least at some stage
[Guest]: and age, you are, we are all becoming conscious of this and the right gender is chasing that
[Guest]: institution and the right one is running away from it finally.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great insight.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope some of these older women can act as a cool aunt for their younger nieces and
[Amit Varma]: so on and tell them ki bachho, just chill, koi jaldi nahi hai.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's, you know, talk about like, like we've spoken in the context of offices and
[Amit Varma]: air conditioners and toilets, how the world is sort of designed by men for men, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And another instance of this is the health of women, like at one point, you talk about
[Amit Varma]: how women are often blindsided by biology, you know, you talk about the problems of menstruation,
[Amit Varma]: but I was struck by this quote here, where you write, quote, according to the Guardian,
[Amit Varma]: in the UK, and this is a Guardian's words in the UK, less than 2.5% of publicly funded
[Amit Varma]: research is dedicated solely to reproductive health, despite the fact that one in three
[Amit Varma]: women suffers from a reproductive or gynecological, gynecological, sorry, my pronunciations are
[Amit Varma]: bad health problem, that there is five times more research into erectile dysfunction, which
[Amit Varma]: affects 19% of men than into premenstrual syndrome, which affects 90% of men, stop code,
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: And you also pointed out about how, you know, there'll be so much more research into say
[Amit Varma]: type two diabetes, because, you know, men also have it as opposed to something like
[Amit Varma]: PCOS.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of tell me a little bit about this, therefore, and also specifically about how
[Amit Varma]: menstruation isn't taken seriously enough, especially by men who just, you know, who
[Amit Varma]: will brush it off and say, oh, it's that time of the month again, or she's PMSing again,
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But for women, it is such a huge issue that impacts their life in such a big way.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I had this friend, a flatmate I used to live with when I first moved to Bombay, and
[Guest]: she used to have very, very painful periods, like, I was fortunate enough that periods
[Guest]: for everyone there, there is discomfort, but it was not like crippling.
[Guest]: For her, it was, she had to take two months, two days off a month.
[Guest]: And that was basically the extent of on leave we got.
[Guest]: So every month, her on leave would go for this, because she would literally be bound
[Guest]: on the bed, and I would often come home to see her crying.
[Guest]: And once or twice she told me, and we used to live on the 11th floor, and she told me
[Guest]: I want to throw myself off out of this window to just to end this misery.
[Guest]: And I was, I was, I would be genuinely very scared for her and her safety, her health.
[Guest]: And I have so many times we've discussed, we should see a doctor.
[Guest]: And no doctor was able to say anything, that's basically the response she would get.
[Guest]: Some would say, that will solve it.
[Guest]: Today, she has a kid and it hasn't solved it.
[Guest]: So by the way.
[Guest]: So and much later in life, I came across a post about, I think it's called endometriosis,
[Guest]: which is that menstruation cycle is the endometrial wall shedding itself.
[Guest]: And that process of that shedding is sometimes exceptionally painful.
[Guest]: And it's like a pain that most people will not be able to tolerate.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very high grade pain.
[Guest]: And people are, women are not only going through it, but they are coming to work, doing, working
[Guest]: alongside men, performing equally well, sometimes better than them, while bearing that pain.
[Guest]: And there is nothing that the medical science is doing to address it.
[Guest]: So endometriosis is one of the many conditions, like you said, polycystic ovarian syndrome,
[Guest]: endometriosis, most types of cancers that affect only women.
[Guest]: All of this is like very, very exceptionally poorly funded.
[Guest]: So even when the COVID vaccine came out, I went for the vaccine and they asked me, are
[Guest]: you still feeding your baby?
[Guest]: And I wasn't at the time, so I could get the vaccine.
[Guest]: But if you were feeding your child, just the jury is out.
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: Can you take it or not?
[Guest]: Pregnant women can't take it and lactating women also can't, we won't suggest it.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because you have not done any research on it.
[Guest]: So COVID vaccine was made in a very crunch situation, but almost all, almost completely
[Guest]: all of medical science is tuned towards the needs of men, even when it is recreational
[Guest]: needs like erectile dysfunction, not to diminish what kind of condition that must be, but again,
[Guest]: it's just about numbers.
[Amit Varma]: 19% versus 90%.
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Guest]: So 90%, like almost every woman you'll talk to has a story about PMS, which is painful,
[Guest]: which is debilitating and I don't know how many men will even admit to it, but that's
[Guest]: not a very common condition.
[Guest]: So there is this definite big gap in just medical funding.
[Guest]: The second thing that I want to talk about and I've written a couple of pieces about
[Guest]: it is also the medical response, the response of the medical community to women, women's
[Guest]: pain and women's needs.
[Guest]: So I've written a piece about how the men are seen as, you know, brave and putting up
[Guest]: a brave face where women are hysterical.
[Guest]: So brave men and hysterical women, that's the name of the piece that when a man says,
[Guest]: I'm in pain, this man is so brave, he's tolerating the pain.
[Guest]: And when a woman says, I'm in pain, she's hysterical, she just has a low pain threshold.
[Guest]: Whereas the fact is that women will go through pain, which is often much worse than anything
[Guest]: men will ever experience.
[Guest]: So like the pain of delivery, for instance, is worse than the pain of losing a limb.
[Guest]: So if I chopped off a person's arm, it would hurt them less than it hurts to deliver a
[Guest]: baby.
[Guest]: And almost every woman does it in her life, or at least everyone who's having a vaginal
[Guest]: birth will do it.
[Guest]: And so there is not enough pain relief for women.
[Guest]: In fact, I've written a piece on obstetric violence, which is just horrifying stuff that
[Guest]: is done to women who are during labor.
[Guest]: My friend who's a doctor, she told me that in districts, in hospitals, they used to lay
[Guest]: four women on a steel bed at a time, so that they get hurt.
[Guest]: They'll just strip off their clothes and in that indignified position, they'll say, okay,
[Guest]: start pushing.
[Guest]: And my friend, she said, I was doing an episiotomy, which is a scary thing that is done during
[Guest]: labor.
[Guest]: And she said that I was giving her anesthesia because it's a cut you have to put in the
[Guest]: vagina.
[Guest]: And she said, before cutting, I was giving her an anesthesia injection, and the nurse
[Guest]: came and said, ma'am, why are you wasting the injection on her, she's already in pain,
[Guest]: let it be a little more.
[Guest]: And I've spoken to women who have been, a friend of mine, she was a nurse practitioner,
[Guest]: and she said that, I've seen women being slapped during labor, that why are you yelling, slapping.
[Guest]: We were slut-shamed during her labor, that it was a lot of fun having sex, now we know
[Guest]: how painful it is.
[Guest]: So, you know, things like this, it's inhuman, it's unimaginable that this is the way we
[Guest]: are treating women for, our mothers, our sisters, whom we respect so much in our speeches, when
[Guest]: they are becoming mothers, at that time, we treat her like, like vermin.
[Guest]: There is, there are stories now, and in India, it is not as well documented.
[Guest]: I've read papers about it in the US, where there is better documentation of it, or for
[Guest]: example, there was a doctor who tied a woman's legs together, so she couldn't deliver a baby,
[Guest]: so he could go take his lunch break, okay, I want to have a quick lunch, just so she
[Guest]: doesn't deliver while I'm away, tie her legs together.
[Guest]: So I mean, it's just, it's criminal, inhuman, animals would not behave like this, I mean,
[Guest]: I don't want to insult animals by calling this animalistic behavior.
[Guest]: So it's, that's the kind of caregiving that we give to women, and I was, I myself had
[Guest]: a very, very difficult birth because of the, because my caregiver, my, my doctor saw me
[Guest]: as a baby-carrying vessel, like I've written.
[Guest]: So it was, ke, ha tumko yeh dard ho raha hai, yeh problem hai, ha toh yeh toh hoga hi na,
[Guest]: bachcha peda karna hai toh yeh sab nahi, jhelogi kya, jao jhelo.
[Guest]: And so, I mean, the standing joke between many moms is that, if men were supposed to
[Guest]: give birth, or have periods, we would have five-star lounges all over the place, ki jao,
[Guest]: kahan jaake paanch din check-in karlo, aur aaraam se period karke aa jaana, like that,
[Guest]: those are the facilities we would provide if men were going through these things.
[Guest]: But because it is women going through them, we are treated as, just, I mean, as, as vermin,
[Guest]: like I said, ke, mein tab kuch fark hi nahi pad raha hai tumhari, your, your suffering
[Guest]: is, is meaningless to us, and in fact, it's well-deserved because you're a woman, and
[Guest]: this is your lot.
[Amit Varma]: And not just these contexts, other contexts, like in that post-braveman and hysterical
[Amit Varma]: woman you quote, someone called Shefali, talking about what happened to her after an operation,
[Amit Varma]: where she says, quote, it was a complicated surgery and I suffered from extreme headaches
[Amit Varma]: during recovery.
[Amit Varma]: When I told my neurologist to give me something for the pain, she addressed my parents instead
[Amit Varma]: of me.
[Amit Varma]: Tell your daughter she has to bear children.
[Amit Varma]: What is this pain in comparison?
[Amit Varma]: We later discovered that my brain had actual swelling post-surgery, which caused the severe
[Amit Varma]: headaches.
[Amit Varma]: I kept begging for painkillers, but my own doctor made light of the pain, stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: and I was struck that that neurologist is a she, you know, still, there is this sort
[Amit Varma]: of this way of thinking that women's pain doesn't matter, and it's, you know, so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And, and I absolutely love this quote in your earlier post on menstruation as well.
[Amit Varma]: You've quoted Melissa McKeown, you know, and people keep joking about PMS, for example,
[Unknown]: and how women behave and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's this lovely quote by Melissa McKeown, I'll read out quote, let's put this shit to
[Amit Varma]: bed right now.
[Amit Varma]: Women don't lose their minds when they have period related irritability.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't lower their ability to reason, it lowers their patience, and hence tolerance
[Amit Varma]: for bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: If an issue comes up a lot during that time of the month, that doesn't mean she only cares
[Amit Varma]: about it once a month.
[Amit Varma]: It means she's bothered by it all the time, and lacks the capacity once a month to shove
[Amit Varma]: it down and bury it beneath six gulps of willful silence, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And so sort of expressive there, let's, let's talk about safety, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, earlier, I had, you know, quoted Natasha, who you spoke to in your post about
[Amit Varma]: should we lock up all the women, where she spoke about the paranoia, or what men would
[Amit Varma]: call paranoia that every time she enters a public space, she's looking, she's making
[Amit Varma]: sure where is the exit route, where can I escape?
[Amit Varma]: What do I have to defend myself with?
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you write, quote, no matter who the fault lies with, it is a woman's freedom
[Amit Varma]: that gets curtailed.
[Amit Varma]: And that has conditioned us to be wary to the point of paranoia, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And Kavita Krishnan wrote a great book called Fearless Freedom about this.
[Amit Varma]: She was on my show as well.
[Amit Varma]: And here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to circle back to something that you mentioned about your engineering
[Amit Varma]: college in Kurukshetra, right, that women weren't supposed to go out, if 4.30 classes
[Amit Varma]: are over, you have to stay in the hostel till 5.30, you know, you managed to fashion out
[Amit Varma]: of thin air and aunt in Karnal, but otherwise, that's generally where you're stuck.
[Amit Varma]: And I was chatting with Alice Evans yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know, and she's, of course, a researcher on gender.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know whether this episode will come before that or what the order will be.
[Amit Varma]: But she pointed to what she calls an honor income trade off, right, where she's looking
[Amit Varma]: into the question of why don't more women work in the subcontinent that question gets
[Amit Varma]: complicated, elsewhere in the world, if your economic opportunities go up for women, and
[Amit Varma]: the incentives go in that direction, then more women can work.
[Amit Varma]: But over here, there is an honor, income trade off, in the sense that it is not only the
[Amit Varma]: income, there is a drive towards female seclusion, that families believe that their honor can
[Amit Varma]: get sullied if the woman goes out, because she could get abducted or raped or have an
[Amit Varma]: affair or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And to protect their honor, that they have this drive towards female seclusion.
[Amit Varma]: And Alice was pointing to this study by two fine economists whom I also bumped into recently
[Amit Varma]: at a conference with Vidya Mahambre and Soumya Dhanraj.
[Amit Varma]: And Alice told me about this.
[Amit Varma]: So this is secondhand.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't read that study myself yet, because the recording just happened yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: But the study apparently talks about this factory, which employs women, but which kind
[Amit Varma]: of herds them to the factory in a very protective sort of environment, there are strict timings,
[Amit Varma]: and then it deposits them back safely at home.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, this is supposed to be a feature, not a bug, because in the families of those
[Amit Varma]: women can feel safe, ki theek hai kuch nahi hoga.
[Amit Varma]: So the urge to female seclusion, therefore, doesn't become such a big factor.
[Amit Varma]: And in that honor income trade off, the honor is less of a worry, because the factory is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, taking the women in such a cloistered way in and out of the factory.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the income part plays more of a part in the women actually work.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I was thinking, you know, this came to mind when you spoke of the hostel in Kurukshetra,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, being able to tell the parents of young girls that your girls are safe here.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, I agree with you that the rule is deeply misogynistic, that the
[Amit Varma]: men can lie around drinking in campus all night, but the women have to be there by 5.30.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously misogynistic.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem that it is solving for is also a misogynistic problem, the honor income
[Amit Varma]: trade off for which many parents may say ki meri beti college nahi jaayegi.
[Amit Varma]: But then if you tell her ki theek hai, aapke beti ko jaane do, wo safe hai, aise roles
[Amit Varma]: hai, usko theek se rakhenge, and then they might agree.
[Amit Varma]: And the larger point which I am therefore coming at is that I think sometimes what happens
[Amit Varma]: is we see a problem, and we want a utopian solution where everything just disappears.
[Amit Varma]: So the ideal world that I want to live in is where the rule of law is enforced, where
[Amit Varma]: college authorities, police, they all do their job, women are safe, and men and women at
[Amit Varma]: any point of night can go out and do whatever the hell they want.
[Amit Varma]: But there would be an argument that you are not going to get there overnight, that there
[Amit Varma]: are compromises and trade offs that you make on the way there.
[Amit Varma]: So in isolation, something like this that seems misogynistic, is actually making the
[Amit Varma]: other deeper problem, the honor income trade off, which has women cooped up at home, it's
[Amit Varma]: actually helping in at least making baby steps towards progress.
[Amit Varma]: So how do we think about this?
[Amit Varma]: Because a lot of what we see in our society is regressive.
[Amit Varma]: But is it also something we should do that we should look at the trend across time and
[Amit Varma]: see if things are getting better.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm kind of thinking aloud, because this thought was sparked off by what you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: earlier there in my conversation with Alice yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: But I think you get the drift.
[Amit Varma]: And the drift and the broad question is, how should we think about progress?
[Guest]: Utopian, the final stage of progress is that everyone is free to do whatever they want.
[Guest]: You want to work, you work, you don't want to work, you sit at home, and applies to both
[Guest]: men and women, as long as financially things are taken care of.
[Guest]: So that's the end stage, of course.
[Guest]: But I see the honor income trade off, and it reminded me of a story while you were talking
[Guest]: about how this building, somebody, I know, guard was spreading a rumor, that here in
[Guest]: this flat, this mother and daughter have come, and this mother gets her daughter to do business.
[Guest]: And this man, the guard says, I see at night.
[Guest]: And then people like, somebody questioned further, how do you know, what did you see?
[Guest]: And then he was like, and then later they found out she was working at a call center,
[Guest]: which has overnight work, but again, like you say, you know, the mindset is that family
[Guest]: honor is being saluted because the girl is going out to work at night.
[Guest]: And the other point about public safety that I have made in that piece that you're referring
[Guest]: to, is also not so much about the end stage of streets are safe for everybody.
[Guest]: It's also about while the streets are unsafe, who are we holding responsible for the mishaps
[Guest]: that are going down, the crimes that are going down?
[Guest]: Are we holding the perpetrators of those crime responsible or the victims?
[Guest]: So, if a woman is getting assaulted on the street, are we asking her, itne baje kya kar
[Guest]: nahi, yeh skirt ki length kitni thi, kya kaam karne gayi thi, padhai karne gayi thi, ke
[Guest]: kisi friend se milne gayi thi, padhai karne is vulnerable, friend se milne is not.
[Guest]: Pitchar dekhne gayi thi, then you deserved it totally.
[Guest]: You know, if you were drunk, then you were asking for it.
[Guest]: So that, that's basically the question that I have raised in that piece.
[Guest]: And it's, the book that I've referred to, which we can also link is called Violator,
[Guest]: which is a whole movement, not about let's make streets safer for women as much as even
[Guest]: before that.
[Guest]: Let's at least accept that on our unsafe street, women's are, it's unsafe for women, but the
[Guest]: solution is not to lock up the women.
[Guest]: It is to do something about that safety question.
[Guest]: And if something happens, give women the right to make these quote unquote mistakes.
[Guest]: You say that itne baje wahan jaana was a mistake because you got assaulted when you went there.
[Guest]: First of all, she didn't make the mistake.
[Guest]: He committed a crime.
[Guest]: So let's get that clear first, because the headlines will always say woman raped in Noida
[Guest]: at night.
[Guest]: It will never say man raped woman in Noida at night.
[Guest]: That's never the headline.
[Guest]: So let's first turn the narrative around and hold the perpetrator responsible for the lack
[Guest]: of safety and the crime.
[Guest]: And second, let's allow women the right to make these quote unquote mistakes.
[Guest]: Theek hai, jaao raat ko jaao, jaaha jaana hai jaao, jo pehna hai pehno.
[Guest]: We are adults, you are making choices, keeping your own safety and your other parameters
[Guest]: in mind.
[Guest]: So let's at least give women the right to do that.
[Guest]: If a man gets mugged at night, batua chori ho gaya, kisi ne bhusa maar diya, toh hum
[Guest]: toh nahi kehate hai na, it's your fault, you should have not gone there.
[Guest]: What were you wearing?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Batua mein itte rupe the kyu?
[Guest]: No one asks these questions to a man, but they'll say that area is unsafe, wahan ke
[Guest]: ladko ne yeh kar diya, attack kar diya humare izzat daar samajh ke members ko.
[Guest]: Then we'll be upset with the perpetrators.
[Guest]: So why is it that we are upset with the victim when it's a crime against a woman?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you'd made a great post on this called the burden of language.
[Amit Varma]: And the quote that I like to give to illustrate how language matters so much is by Jackson
[Amit Varma]: Katz.
[Amit Varma]: And what Katz had said was, quote, we talk about how many women were raped last year,
[Amit Varma]: not about how many men raped women.
[Amit Varma]: We talk about how many girls in the school district were harassed last year, not about
[Amit Varma]: how many boys harassed girls.
[Amit Varma]: We talk about how many teenage girls got pregnant in the state of Vermont last year, rather
[Amit Varma]: than how many men and teenage boys got girls pregnant.
[Amit Varma]: So you can see how the effect of this passive voice has a political effect.
[Amit Varma]: It shifts the focus of men and boys and on to girls and women.
[Amit Varma]: Even the term violence against women is problematic.
[Amit Varma]: It's a passive construction.
[Amit Varma]: There's no active agent in the sentence.
[Amit Varma]: It's a bad thing that happens to women.
[Amit Varma]: But when you look at that term violence against women, nobody is doing it to them.
[Amit Varma]: It just happens.
[Unknown]: Men aren't even a part of it.
[Unknown]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And in the episode that I did with Shrena Bhattacharya, the loneliness of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: woman, she pointed out about how women will often say something like, meri shadi ho rahi
[Amit Varma]: hai.
[Amit Varma]: Meri shadi ho rahi hai mein shadi kar rahi ho.
[Amit Varma]: And the first sentence lacks agency, meri shadi ho rahi hai.
[Amit Varma]: And the second sentence, mein shadi kar rahi ho, is a little better.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a way in which language matters.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, this Jackson Katz quote was pointed out to me by one of your fellow writing course
[Amit Varma]: participants, Rita Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, so I completely agree.
[Amit Varma]: In just going back to the progress question, and again, I'm thinking aloud, like you've
[Amit Varma]: written another great post about how when, when a man says something like, oh, I allow
[Amit Varma]: my wife to work, right?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, that's such a patriarchal asshole way of saying that it's like, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: she's your property, and you have to allow her to work.
[Amit Varma]: But the other way of thinking about it is at least a woman is working, right?
[Amit Varma]: You take baby steps, you take one step at a time, that perhaps that sure, his, his tone,
[Amit Varma]: his approach that I'm allowing her to work is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: But it is a much bigger problem when she was actually literally not being allowed to work.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps you have to take baby steps to kind of go ahead.
[Guest]: Yeah, but then where do we stop?
[Guest]: Her parents also did her a favor by allowing her to be born, no?
[Guest]: So then, kitna neeche giraenge bar ko?
[Guest]: So it's about, I mean, ideally, as we evolve as a society, the bar should be, should be
[Amit Varma]: going higher.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: What I'm saying is that there are gradations to this, I mean, so let me turn that question
[Amit Varma]: about progress around and say that, what is your sense of how much progress women have
[Amit Varma]: then made?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what your newsletter does so well, is that it tells you that on so many margins,
[Amit Varma]: things really suck, things are really bad.
[Amit Varma]: And we are in full agreement about all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Has there been progress?
[Amit Varma]: Is that progress?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a trend line that you can see to this?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just looking at Me Too, for example, at one level, I was pretty optimistic that
[Amit Varma]: things will change, perhaps too optimistic, because I thought this, at least changes the
[Amit Varma]: incentives for men.
[Amit Varma]: Even if men don't start behaving better deeply from inside, at least it changes their incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I don't know how much of that is really true.
[Amit Varma]: MJ Akbar is still getting invited to literature festivals, Tarun Tejpal is still a social
[Amit Varma]: gadfly on the circuits, and of course, you have a great post about Mr. Tejpal also, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: So, what is your sense of the progress that has happened and the progress that is happening?
[Amit Varma]: Because the older feminists have spoken to on this show in the past from Kavita Krishnan
[Amit Varma]: to Manjima Bhattacharya, and so on, will say that there has been progress, it is slow,
[Amit Varma]: but let's appreciate that there has been progress, and things will not suddenly change overnight.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So, what's your sense as, you know, a younger feminist and then maybe a generation down,
[Amit Varma]: though I know you don't use that word, of course.
[Guest]: No, I mean, by the way, it's no personal aversion to the word, I totally identify as a feminist,
[Guest]: but I'm just saying that the word means different things to different people, and therefore,
[Unknown]: I avoid using it.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: If the same word has different means to different people, then it loses its utility in conveying
[Guest]: meaning, which is the purpose of words.
[Guest]: So sadly, that has happened to this word.
[Guest]: So easily I avoided, personally, I have no aversion to it.
[Guest]: I think I'm optimistic about the future.
[Guest]: I have at least two young readers who have written to me, one was 12, and one is 13.
[Guest]: And the 13 year old wrote to me after the Tarun Tejpal post incidentally, and I was
[Guest]: horrified, because at that point, I had no idea that I had an audience, teenage audience
[Guest]: out there and the Tarun Tejpal post is stark.
[Guest]: I mean, it talks in graphic detail about the crime that happened against the woman and
[Guest]: exactly what transpired that night, because it is important to interpret, those facts
[Guest]: are important to interpret the judgment, because at every point, there is a crime happening
[Guest]: against the woman and at every point, the judgment is putting the blame on the woman
[Guest]: for all the crimes happening against her.
[Guest]: So I had written that post and it was quite out there in explicit in the language and
[Guest]: the exact nature of the crime that happened, and then I was horrified that a 13 year old
[Guest]: read it and was feeling personally responsible for should I be censoring these things.
[Guest]: But then the message she sent me was, I mean, it was so moving.
[Guest]: She said that, ma'am, I read your post and it was so enlightening for me, there is rape
[Guest]: culture and women are being raped and victimized and then our legal system is not able to give
[Guest]: justice.
[Guest]: And I just, I mean, at 13, I had none of these ideas, I could not use these words, this language.
[Guest]: Not that I felt not empowered enough to use them, but that language was not in my mind
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: I was not thinking about these issues, I would certainly not have been able to articulate
[Guest]: them as well as she did.
[Guest]: And so that, then the other 12 year old reader I'm talking about is the daughter of one of
[Guest]: our batchmates in the clear writing cohort, and he told me that she, every Monday she
[Guest]: waits for the post and she sits and refreshes, aaya ki nahi aaya, aaya ki nahi aaya.
[Guest]: So then I was like, yaar usko subscribe kara do, usko bohot jayega main box mein.
[Guest]: And then he said that she sits and waits for that post and then she reads it and then Saturday
[Guest]: ko she makes us sit down, ke mummy papa baitho, ab hum is hafte ki womaning post ke aare baat
[Guest]: karenge, ke Mahima aunty ne kya likha hai, aur kya wo hamare ghar mein ho raha hai, and
[Guest]: what can we do better.
[Amit Varma]: This is amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Guest]: And, and then, I mean, I wrote that post about the subtle sexism we are teaching our children,
[Guest]: and in that post she sent me personally, through her dad, she sent me photos of her textbooks,
[Guest]: which bothered her.
[Guest]: And it is amazing to me that, wo fourth standard mein thi, aur uski textbook mein, you look
[Guest]: at doctor, scientist, engineer, judge, all are men, nurse, secretary, teacher, these
[Guest]: are women, and she was, she saw this, and in fourth standard, she was upset by this,
[Guest]: enough to tell her dad, that why, why are women shown only in these roles and not in
[Guest]: those roles?
[Guest]: Can I not become a doctor when I grow up?
[Guest]: Can I not become a judge when I grow up?
[Guest]: And I am upset that these are the messages coming to women, and who is the author of
[Guest]: this book?
[Guest]: I will write a letter to them.
[Guest]: And in fourth standard, it blew my mind that this happened to any individual in this country.
[Guest]: And therefore, that makes me optimistic about the future.
[Guest]: I know these are, so I know this is anecdotal evidence, and these are not like stark figures
[Guest]: across the country kind of patterns, but I mean, I am, I am, I am amazed that even one
[Guest]: such child exists in this country, and I'm sure it's not just one child.
[Guest]: And therefore, the discourse is what gives me hope.
[Guest]: The fact that there was a Me Too movement, I know it did not lead to the perfect kind
[Guest]: of results that we wanted from it, or might have hoped for.
[Guest]: But the fact that those conversations are happening, the fact that we recognize there's
[Guest]: a glass ceiling, the fact that on LinkedIn, you see diversity hires for coders, and women
[Guest]: can only apply for this position.
[Guest]: I like it.
[Guest]: I love all of that, that there is, I know in our panchayati raj system, we have a woman
[Guest]: sarpanch reservation, and it leads to sarpanch patis who are controlling things from behind
[Guest]: the woman, and she's cutting aloo sabzi at home, whereas he's signing all the papers
[Guest]: for all the decisions to be taken in the panchayat office.
[Guest]: Yeh hota hai.
[Guest]: But even then, the fact that we are having these conversations, and young women of tomorrow
[Guest]: are able to articulate these thoughts, are able to analyze these things, or are even
[Guest]: incensed or offended by the fact that this stuff is happening around us, gives me a lot
[Guest]: of hope.
[Guest]: The second thing was what I said earlier about there should be an entrance exam for having
[Guest]: kids.
[Guest]: Because you often say that change happens one funeral at a time, but I think change
[Guest]: also happens one birth at a time, however immoral you might think it is.
[Guest]: And I think that if we are all able to raise the change makers of tomorrow, then we've
[Guest]: done good jobs as parents.
[Guest]: And so upbringing is a huge, that's why I feel like there should be an entrance exam
[Guest]: because you should not bring up another person who's going to perpetuate the same crap that
[Amit Varma]: we've been doing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeh toh samjho yaar ki agar entrance exam hua, kaun karega state karega, who is running
[Amit Varma]: the state.
[Amit Varma]: The entrance exam will be selecting for sanskari parents, quote unquote, not for progressive
[Guest]: parents.
[Amit Varma]: Privatize kara do yaar, sarkari khatiya private karo.
[Amit Varma]: That's my line, you're stealing my line.
[Amit Varma]: Theek hai.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is very inspiring, and I would not dismiss that young girl who reads you
[Amit Varma]: as anecdotal evidence, anecdotes are people too.
[Amit Varma]: And that panchayat thing actually illustrates exactly what I mean that, you know, that even
[Amit Varma]: if the sarpanch pati is kind of doing everything and she's cutting this thing, I think we have
[Amit Varma]: sort of enough data.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Karthik Munlidharan was talking about it in his episode with me, if I remember,
[Amit Varma]: that has actually helped.
[Amit Varma]: That has actually helped, it's moved the bar a little bit, it will not take you to a utopian
[Unknown]: perfect solution.
[Amit Varma]: But it is better than nothing, it's moved the bar a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what is important.
[Amit Varma]: I've just taken a lot of your time and I know being a responsible parent, you'll be wishing
[Amit Varma]: to rush back home.
[Amit Varma]: So just three final questions.
[Amit Varma]: The digressions may occur.
[Amit Varma]: Third last question.
[Amit Varma]: You once told a Bollywood superstar that his movies are mythogenistic, kindly elaborate.
[Guest]: Oh man, I have to really filter who, what all names I take here.
[Guest]: So let's think about a fictitious sector that I worked in.
[Guest]: Anyone who has heard this podcast knows what I'm talking about.
[Amit Varma]: Please don't, please don't put words in my mouth.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: No words in your mouth.
[Guest]: So there is a, there is a fictitious sector that I worked in.
[Guest]: There was a very popular Bollywood movie which was made around this sector.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: It was the biggest hit of that year.
[Guest]: And it was a movie made to raise awareness about the sector that I work in.
[Guest]: So we were called in to give technical consultation on this movie that, you know, just check it,
[Guest]: technology and all of that, that we show in the movie before.
[Guest]: So I was on the panel of people going to Mumbai and to the star's home or his studio to review
[Guest]: the movie.
[Guest]: And before I went only one of the seniors at my workplace who knew my perversions took
[Guest]: me aside and warned me, Mahima, none of your gender things there.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: None of your gender things.
[Guest]: Only technical.
[Guest]: Nothing gender.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I was like, yes, sir.
[Guest]: Yours obediently.
[Guest]: So we went there.
[Guest]: The star is also known for his discipline.
[Guest]: So he wakes up at 4 a.m. and works out and everything, right.
[Guest]: So we also had to get up at 4 a.m. to meet him because by 5 a.m. he's done with his workout
[Guest]: and we have to go reach his studio by 5.
[Guest]: So 5 a.m. we reached there and then they show us the movie and we are sitting in the same
[Guest]: room and he's, we're sitting in a U-shape and he's sitting across from me right in front
[Guest]: of the screen.
[Guest]: And so the movie plays and the first half, it's like a semi-edited version, it is called
[Guest]: rushes.
[Guest]: Abhi full editing nahi huya, kahin kahin sound is off, kuch kuch parts nikaal diya jayenge
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: But broadly you can see like 90% movie is there.
[Guest]: So he shows it to us and first half is over.
[Guest]: By the time of the first half, nothing technical has happened so far in this fictitious sector
[Guest]: that relates to us.
[Guest]: So really there's no feedback for us to give.
[Guest]: But at the time of interval, pause liya and he looks, he looks around and he says that
[Guest]: what did you all think of it, any initial thoughts and then because I'm sitting right
[Guest]: across from him, he looks at me and says, let's start with the lady.
[Guest]: Now if you see the first half of this film, it's basically the love story in the first
[Guest]: half.
[Guest]: The boy is courting the girl and when I say courting, what I mean is that she is a student,
[Guest]: he is a cycle repairwala, probably 20 years elder to her, even in the fictitious world
[Guest]: of the film, and is chasing her around with his mobile phone, taking pictures of her and
[Guest]: videos of her without her consent.
[Guest]: At one point, he prints out a photo of her on a large hoarding for his cycle shopka ad
[Guest]: and that's supposed to show his love for her.
[Guest]: She takes a train from one small town to another to go study to her college, wo train mein
[Guest]: roz sube uske peeche chadta hai aur shaam ko cycle pe uska peecha karta hua ghar tak usse.
[Amit Varma]: Max creepy.
[Guest]: Max creepy.
[Guest]: Now, a womaning lady is in this room and has been asked to give feedback and so far nothing
[Guest]: technical has happened, only this much has happened, so, and then, and I'm, all this
[Guest]: time I'm thinking, damn mujhse koi poochhe na, bas don't ask me what I think about this,
[Guest]: don't ask me because I cannot hold back.
[Guest]: This is exactly what is wrong with our films, you know, exactly that the woman has no agency,
[Guest]: what you're showing is essentially sexual harassment and because it's your beautiful,
[Guest]: lovable, loved, most loved star of India is doing it and he's a six foot tall, fair skinned,
[Guest]: beautiful man, so it looks like love to us.
[Guest]: But if the same thing was being done by an actual cyclewala to your daughter, you would
[Guest]: be incensed and you would want him in jail today, right?
[Guest]: So, but because it is this packaging, so we are calling it love.
[Guest]: And I was like, mujhse koi poochhe na, bas, because I can feel the senior sitting next
[Guest]: to me who told me none of your gender things and I'm like, yeh meri naukriyaat jayegi.
[Guest]: And at that moment, the superstar looks at me and says, let's start with the lady.
[Guest]: And I'm like that, yeah, great film, Mr. So-and-so, my only small peeve with it is, why can't
[Guest]: we show a man and a woman falling in love in a Hindi movie without the man stalking
[Guest]: the woman?
[Guest]: And that line, I said, and I was like, hogaya mera, ab mai chup, ab meri naukri jaari hai,
[Guest]: but the, how many times do you get to face the country's biggest star and tell him exactly
[Amit Varma]: what is wrong in most of the, not just our country's biggest star, but arguably Canada's
[Amit Varma]: biggest star also, but continue, continue.
[Guest]: No comments.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so then, so to my surprise, this man is horrified that I said this.
[Guest]: He's not even horrified, he's surprised that I said this.
[Guest]: He's taken completely aback.
[Guest]: And I thought that, you know, he has a wife who's a very famous feminist, by the way.
[Guest]: She's writing columns after columns about women's empowerment agency, everything.
[Guest]: Like, ki isko pata hai, yeh jaan ke kar rahe hain, they're, I mean, stars, they might seem
[Guest]: shallow or whatever to us.
[Guest]: I'm sure they're extremely intelligent people, they've, you don't get that rich and popular
[Guest]: and successful without having a serious amount of intelligence.
[Guest]: So I thought, ki isko pata hai, and he's going to tell me that, you know, karna padta hai,
[Guest]: or whatever, or whatever rationalization is there in his mind, it will be something reasonable.
[Guest]: But then he's shocked that I said this, and he gets offended, and he says, stalking?
[Guest]: Aap isko stalking kehti hain?
[Guest]: So I was like, ke, haan, matlab, without her consent, you're taking her photographs.
[Guest]: So he's like, kyu, aapki koi photo kheechta hai, aapko achcha nahi lagta hai?
[Guest]: He's like, not without my consent, sorry.
[Guest]: So he's like, hum jaate shooting karne, sab humaari photo kheechta hai.
[Amit Varma]: And I was just like, stunned into silence that this man really thinks that a public
[Guest]: figure's photo being taken in a public setting is the same as a man stalking a woman without
[Guest]: her consent like this, through the streets of Mathura, or wherever they are.
[Guest]: So I was like, yaar, I was just, I was silent after that because I was like, I've done enough
[Guest]: damage to my career at this point, let's start putting our CV on LinkedIn, jo naukri gana
[Guest]: liye, because I can sense the guy sitting next to me is looking daggers at me.
[Guest]: And then we went around the room, and our star is very upset, and muh phula ho ekdum,
[Guest]: and he's pouting, and everybody else is trying to overcompensate for the damage I have done.
[Guest]: Nahi, nahi, sir, kitni achchi movie, what a great movie, this is amazing, it's going
[Guest]: to be the blockbuster.
[Guest]: And a couple of them even went a step ahead to counter what I had said, that, you know
[Guest]: what, I disagree with what she's saying, because pyaar aise hi hota hai, asli India mein aise
[Guest]: hi hota hai.
[Guest]: Inko ye Delhi-Mumbai ki ladkiyon ko lagta hoga, but asli India mein aise hi hota hai.
[Guest]: Maini apni bivi ko, main aise hi unka college ki aad peechha karta tha, hamara pyaar bhi
[Guest]: aise hi hua tha, like to this extent.
[Guest]: I was genuinely thinking that some of them are fathers of daughters, aur kuch nahi tha
[Guest]: mataon, bhenon, wetiyon ke liye sochla.
[Guest]: Like, would you like it if your local cycle repair shop guy is chasing your daughter across
[Guest]: the street, taking her photos?
[Guest]: Or anybody, you know.
[Guest]: I know, I know, I'm bringing an unnecessary class angle to it, I know, but I'm just saying
[Guest]: that that's the setting that is shown in the movie.
[Guest]: You know, even the poshest guy comes in a Mercedes CL class and takes a photo of your
[Guest]: child without her consent, you would be incensed, but because it is the handsome tall man in
[Guest]: the room, the powerful alpha male in the room, you are all agreeing with him.
[Guest]: And then I was like, ke chalo, in my mind, I'm already thinking of the next job and to
[Guest]: have to do.
[Guest]: But luckily in the room, there was this senior lady and she was at a joint secretary level
[Guest]: at that time and now probably going to become a secretary soon.
[Guest]: And she said that we might disagree with what Mahima said, but that is the way that the
[Guest]: women of the future think.
[Guest]: And I think we should respect that.
[Guest]: So that's all she said.
[Guest]: She was very, she's like one of the most graceful women I know.
[Guest]: And that kind of shut everybody up somehow because a woman with some authority had said
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And obviously the hero was upset all through, didn't eat breakfast, but didn't lose my job
[Guest]: because of that, thankfully.
[Amit Varma]: You would have gone home and fought with his wife and he would, he would have said, you
[Amit Varma]: know, she said this and his wife would have said she is right.
[Guest]: And then they would have fought and God knows, once the film released, there were articles
[Guest]: written about how this film glorifies stalking.
[Guest]: And then I kind of quietly send that link to the senior gender without comment, shared
[Guest]: without comment and got no response from that side, but don't do your gender thing.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So my second last question, and this is like one of the pointers that you sent me in that
[Amit Varma]: brief list of things that you wanted to talk about.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll go back to that.
[Amit Varma]: This pointer says how Amit Verma causes strife in my marriage.
[Guest]: And this is where it comes at.
[Guest]: Conversations with women are far richer.
[Guest]: I can promise you can call Salil here for 10 episodes, but I'm telling you right now.
[Guest]: So last two weeks back, I released the first episode of my podcast, which we were discussing
[Guest]: before this, the technicalities of my mic and everything.
[Guest]: So I released the first episode and a lot of people like heard it and immediately on
[Guest]: that group, a comment came on our group where these writing students are there, that one
[Guest]: of them said that I've just had a baby a month back.
[Guest]: And that episode, that my podcast episode is about breastfeeding and how there is this
[Guest]: unreasonable pressure on women that pehle din se you have to be mother dairy and then
[Guest]: you have to do exactly for this many days aur iss se kam kiya toh you are an unworthy
[Guest]: mother, iss se zyada kiya toh what is this creepiness, why are you still feeding a child
[Guest]: who is of X age.
[Guest]: So I called on my podcast, these two women, one of them, she and I were both not able
[Guest]: to breastfeed beyond a point and the other one is still breastfeeding her two and a half
[Guest]: year old.
[Guest]: So we were all talking about that again, you know, there's no middle ground, there is no
[Guest]: one is eating the sweet spot of everyone's approval when it comes to these things.
[Guest]: And so one of the women on our group said that I just had a baby and in the last one
[Guest]: month since I've had a baby, I've felt like a monster who is not able to do something
[Guest]: that seems to come so easily to all other women.
[Guest]: And thank you for finally talking about this and it's the first time in a month that I've
[Guest]: smiled and I found that so heartwarming, I felt again, you know, mission accomplished
[Guest]: wali feeling ke bas isi ke liye kar rahe the, if it is serving this purpose, it's, I've
[Guest]: done my job.
[Guest]: So shaam ko Salil comes home and I'm like, did you like it, how it was, he's like, nahi
[Guest]: I'm still listening to Seen and the Unseen and I'm like, maine aaj podcast nikala hai,
[Guest]: pehle episode hai, you're listening to, I understand the rest of the world, I'm putting
[Guest]: it out on a Monday, I can't compete with Seen and the Unseen but tum toh sun lo.
[Guest]: And he's like, nahi nahi, Amit's guest this time, she's from my school and I was like,
[Guest]: he's in the podcast, I'm like, your wife is in this podcast, can you prioritize, please.
[Guest]: And then on the flip side also, it happens that sometimes he'll recommend a book to me,
[Guest]: like Rukmini's book, he would, I would be watching crap on Netflix and he would come
[Guest]: and shove that book under my nose, yeh padho, this, you are woman and you need to read this.
[Guest]: And then I was like, yaha padh lenge, I'm too tired right now, mental load saara off
[Guest]: ke main, tabs thodi dair hibernation mein daal ke, I'm right now wedging, so don't come
[Guest]: into my wedge time and yeah, I know your books, your taste is very intellectual and all, toh.
[Guest]: But then I listened to your episode with Rukmini and I was like, yeh book toh padhni padhegi.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is a great book, yeah.
[Guest]: I know, right?
[Guest]: So then he gets very upset ke, maine kaha tha toh kuch nahi, aur Amit ne kaha hai, toh
[Guest]: padhni hai.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of strife that you cause.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so sorry, ab main kya karu, main podcast rokh doon, rokh bhi diya, aapke kaaran toh
[Guest]: aur strife hoga na.
[Amit Varma]: Nah, nah, nah, mat rokh, hum lal denge, hum log sort out kar lenge.
[Amit Varma]: That's so sweet of you guys and I'm very honoured and humbled, but please don't strife on my
[Amit Varma]: behalf if I may turn it into a verb.
[Amit Varma]: Final question.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, for my listeners, what would you like to recommend that they read or they
[Amit Varma]: listen to or they watch or they, you know, any arts that give you great joy?
[Guest]: So there's a lovely book called How to Be Successful Without Hurting Men's Feelings.
[Guest]: It's a wonderful book, it's a collection of couple of comics by Sarah Cooper.
[Guest]: And I mean, I think a couple of clips of this book have gone viral online about, you know,
[Guest]: how a woman says something and the man ignores, then she puts a moustache on her face and
[Guest]: says the same thing.
[Guest]: And then they're like, what a great idea.
[Guest]: So it's a hilarious book and it's talking about everything that we discussed about women
[Guest]: not being taken seriously at work.
[Guest]: Then Invisible Women, which I've already quoted from in this episode so far.
[Guest]: By Caroline Priada Perez.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: There is a book called Untamed by Glennon Doyle.
[Guest]: So Glennon Doyle has published books in the past as well.
[Guest]: But this book has come out after big changes in her life.
[Guest]: So she was earlier a drug addict and then she got married.
[Guest]: She had a baby and immediately the day she found out she was pregnant, she quit drugs
[Guest]: and before that it was like beyond control.
[Guest]: It was damaging her life seriously.
[Guest]: And then she had, I think now she has two or three kids.
[Guest]: After a while, she also figured out that her marriage was no longer working.
[Guest]: And then she fell in love with another woman and is now married to her.
[Guest]: And all through this journey, she also was very, very religious, very strong Christian
[Guest]: ethic.
[Guest]: And I think in some ways she still is, but it comes from a very modern take on that religion.
[Guest]: And I loved it as reading it as a woman and as a mother especially, like I love this couple
[Guest]: of excerpts from it, which I would take photos of and share on these moms groups that I'm
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: One of which was about how she said that I was raising my, I think she has two daughters
[Guest]: and one son.
[Guest]: And she said, I was raising my daughters to be strong women.
[Guest]: And you know, walking down the street, I would point to a random woman and say, what do you
[Guest]: think she is?
[Guest]: Maybe she's a CEO, maybe she's an engineer, maybe she's a doctor.
[Guest]: And you know, just to make them think of women as not in those traditional domestic roles,
[Guest]: but also as beyond that and people who can accomplish anything.
[Guest]: But then she thought that one day her son said something very regressive.
[Guest]: And she said that, I realized that I don't need to just build strong women for the future,
[Guest]: but also men who are ready for that future, for those women.
[Guest]: So I realized that as a mother, I had been failing my son on that account.
[Guest]: And so then she said that now when I walk down the street with my son, I point to men
[Guest]: and say, what do you think he is?
[Guest]: Maybe he's a very loving father.
[Guest]: Maybe he makes great pasta for dinner.
[Guest]: You know, things like that, which is again, not the traditional roles that you would see
[Guest]: men in, but to make him think of other men like that.
[Guest]: So he also starts seeing himself as those as valid roles that he could grow into.
[Guest]: So that's a book I wanted to recommend.
[Guest]: There's another book called Shrill by Lindy West.
[Guest]: So the reason I read this book, it's a very angry book and a very funny book too.
[Guest]: But so the reason I read this book was somebody quoted a line to it, which spoke to me, which
[Guest]: was that feminism is about realizing that everything you love hates you back.
[Guest]: That's the perfect summary of my relationship with Bollywood, right?
[Guest]: I love Bollywood.
[Guest]: I can still to this day sit and watch any old 90s regressive movie.
[Guest]: I will find all the regressive shit in it, but I'll still enjoy it because I'm programmed
[Guest]: to love it now.
[Guest]: And I know it hates me as a woman, right?
[Guest]: Like, I'm still waiting for the DDLJ joke, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: We'll tell you in the next episode.
[Guest]: It's okay.
[Guest]: Small things like this happen in big cities.
[Guest]: Okay, or another thing that I wanted to recommend was another book is Steal Like An Artist.
[Guest]: Then there's another called Show Your Work and third one called Keep Going.
[Guest]: All three are by Austin Kleon, which are basically books that anyone who wants to write and wants
[Guest]: to be any kind of creator or artist should just keep on their table at all times.
[Guest]: They're very, very small books, thin, short books, very easily accessible.
[Guest]: Kisi bhi din kuch bhi uthage, koi bhi page padlo and it'll inspire you in some way.
[Guest]: So these are three beautiful books that I keep very accessible at hand.
[Guest]: I also wanted to recommend a couple of stand-up comedians because I follow stand-up comedy
[Guest]: like anything.
[Guest]: I've also dabbled in it quite successfully, but a bit.
[Guest]: One is Hannah Gatsby.
[Guest]: One is Tig Notaro.
[Guest]: And among men, there's James A. Castor and Indian side, there's a guy called Karunesh
[Guest]: Talwar.
[Guest]: All four of them are excellent and amazing for different reasons, which we can discuss
[Guest]: another time.
[Guest]: But if you haven't heard of them, please look them up.
[Guest]: And if you enjoy stand-up comedy, they to me sound like the voice of the future.
[Amit Varma]: We didn't even talk about your stand-up comedy.
[Guest]: Are you going to try again?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe, maybe not.
[Amit Varma]: At one point you wanted to, right?
[Guest]: You did some gigs.
[Guest]: I did some gigs.
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: And so, in fact, one of them was in CP in Central Park and it was, I was told by the
[Guest]: organisers there that there was an audience of 5000 people, which I don't think was there
[Guest]: at one time.
[Guest]: I think they just did a total count over the evening.
[Guest]: But there are a series of artists and for me, that memory is very great because whatever
[Guest]: I did, I'm sure I will cringe at it today.
[Guest]: And by the way, open challenge to all your listeners, ke koi dhond ke dikhao wo video.
[Guest]: Wo video is somewhere in one corner of the internet.
[Guest]: I know how to find it, but it's very hard to find because the people I did it for were
[Guest]: kind enough to not give me any credits.
[Guest]: So there is, you can't find it by my name probably.
[Guest]: Anyway, so that, that thing I did and as I was getting off stage, the late Ms. Kamila
[Guest]: Bhasin was there.
[Guest]: She was one of the organisers of that event and she came up to me and congratulated me
[Guest]: and shook my hand.
[Guest]: I was like surreal because it was probably the third or fourth performance I was doing
[Guest]: and I was like, please, what are you even saying, Ms. Kamila, you are the OG.
[Guest]: And she was like, nahi nahi hum toh kuch nahi hain, aap artist hain, aap logon hi hain, kalki
[Guest]: awaaz.
[Guest]: And it was just, it was very touching and it was very surreal.
[Guest]: Maybe I'll get back to it someday, don't know right now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, I would love to see that.
[Amit Varma]: But in the meantime, keep doing what you're doing, more power to womaning and anything
[Amit Varma]: else you do.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you so much for giving me so much of your time today.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to The Show Notes, enter rabbit
[Amit Varma]: holes at will.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Mahima's newsletter, Womaning at India, at womaning.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Mahima on Twitter at Mahimavashisht.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.